                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-12101 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had an extensive history of marijuana use. He deliberately failed to fully 
disclose his marijuana use during the security clearance adjudication process on three 
occasions. He used marijuana twice after his security clearance was granted. He failed 
to mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. Drug involvement was 
mitigated because his marijuana use was not recent. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2006, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (2006 SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On November 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and 
E (Personal Conduct) (GE 9). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On November 10, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (GE 10). 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 19, 2009, and the case was 
assigned to me that same day. At the hearing held on April 16, 2009, Department 
Counsel offered seven exhibits (GEs 1-7) (Transcript (Tr.) 27-29). There were no 
objections, and I admitted GEs 1-7 (Tr. 28). Applicant did not provide any exhibits (Tr. 
11). I also admitted the hearing notice (GE 8), the SOR (GE 9), and Applicant’s SOR 
response (GE 10). I received the transcript on April 23, 2009.   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (GE 
10). His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old cost analyst for a defense contractor (Tr. 6, 39, 42).2 
He received his high school diploma in 1993 (Tr. 43). He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2004 (Tr. 6, 34). He has earned some credits towards his master’s degree in business 
administration (MBA) (Tr. 39-40). He is not married (Tr. 41). He held a security 
clearance previously when he was on active duty in the U.S. Marines; however, he does 
not currently hold a security clearance (Tr. 7). His professional goal is to complete his 
MBA and to become a project manager and then a program manager (Tr. 43).  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Marines for four and a half years (Tr. 40). He was 
assigned to an elite unit, Force Recon (Tr. 88). In 2002, he received field-grade level 
nonjudicial punishment (NJP) for dereliction of duty because he failed to prevent a 
subordinate Marine from driving while intoxicated or impaired by alcohol (DUI) (Tr. 89-
90). Applicant and another vehicle occupant were also intoxicated (Tr. 89). He was 
found guilty of the offense; however, he did not receive a reduction in grade from the 
NJP (Tr. 90). He left active duty as a Sergeant (Tr. 41). He received several injuries 
while on active duty and he decided to leave active duty because he did not believe he 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Applicant’s 2008 SF 86 (GE 1) is the source for the facts in this paragraph and the last 
paragraph in this section, unless stated otherwise. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
was medically capable of completing another enlistment (Tr. 21, 90). He did not serve in 
combat (Tr. 22-23, 89-90). 
 
Applicant has never been charged with any felony, firearms or explosives 
offense(s). He has not been arrested or charged with any minor or misdemeanor-type 
offenses in the last seven years, except for arrests and eventually convictions for 
marijuana possession in 1995 and for DUI in 2006. In the last seven years, he has not 
had any debts delinquent over 180 days, bankruptcy petitions, unpaid judgments, or 
unpaid liens. 
 
Illegal Drug Possession and Sale and Alcohol Abuse 
 
 From about 1993 to about 1998, Applicant sometimes used marijuana on a 
weekly basis and at other times, it was every few months (SOR ¶ 1.a; Tr. 43-47, 79-80; 
GE 10). On August 18, 1995, Applicant was charged with marijuana possession (SOR ¶ 
1.c; Tr. 48-49; GE 10). He was convicted of marijuana possession and fined $1,000 
(SOR ¶ 1.d; Tr. 48-49; GE 10). He also attended an alcohol/drug safety action program 
(ASAP), which involved attendance at ten weekly classes (Tr. 50). He did not consider 
the ten classes to be drug therapy or counseling (Tr. 62). He was also required to 
provide three urine samples for drug testing (Tr. 49). The first two tests were positive for 
the marijuana metabolite; however, the third urinalysis test was negative for illegal 
substances (Tr. 49-50). After completion of his ASAP classes, he returned to using 
marijuana until he completed college (Tr. 50). He purchased marijuana on several 
occasions with his friends (drug distribution) while he was in college (SOR ¶ 1.e; Tr. 52; 
GE 10). 
 
Applicant did not use marijuana while in the U.S. Marines (Tr. 53, 71). He was 
drug-tested about five times per year while in the Marines (Tr. 72). About four or five 
months after leaving the Marines (around November 2003), he started using marijuana 
again (Tr. 53). He used marijuana about every three months for the next three years for 
a total of about 12 times (time period: November 2003 to December 2006) (SOR ¶ 1.b; 
Tr. 54; GE 10). At least two of his employers during this period when he was using 
marijuana probably had a policy against use of illegal drugs; however, those two 
employers did not engage in random drug testing although he may have had an initial 
drug test at the start of the employment (Tr. 66-68).  
 
On November 17, 2006, Applicant submitted his application for a security 
clearance (Tr. 55). Two days later, Applicant was arrested for DUI (Tr. 55; SOR ¶ 2.c). 
He pleaded guilty and was convicted (Tr. 74). He was sentenced to 180 days in jail with 
175 days suspended (Tr. 74). He received a $500 fine and court costs (Tr. 74). He 
attended ASAP classes again as part of his DUI sentence (Tr. 63; GE 2 at 3). His 
driver’s license was suspended for about a year (Tr. 74; GE 5). He completed six 
months with an alcohol interlock device in his car (Tr. 75-76; GE 5). He attended 20 
hours of private, alcohol counseling (Tr. 18; GE 2 at 3). He attended two Alcoholics 
Anonymous sessions (GE 2 at 3). He has continued to consume alcohol; however, he 
has not been drunk on alcohol since his DUI, except for New Year’s Day in 2007 (Tr. 
18, 80; GE 2 at 3; GE 3; GE 4).  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant’s interim Secret security clearance was approved on November 27, 
2006, and he used marijuana twice in December 2006 after his security clearance was 
granted (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.b; Tr. 56, 65; GE 10). He does not currently associate with 
the person(s) that provided the marijuana to him from November 2003 to December 
2006, or any other known drug users (Tr. 56-58). Applicant’s employer has not used 
urinalysis tests to verify whether or not Applicant has used illegal drugs since December 
2006 (Tr. 66).  
 
 On February 10, 2007, Applicant received a citation for walking his dog without 
having it on a leash (SOR ¶ 2.d; Tr. 83-84). His dog was not acting aggressively 
towards others or breaching the peace (Tr. 83-84). This citation is too insignificant to 
constitute a security concern. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant said he has not used marijuana since December 2006, 
and he did not intend to use marijuana in the future (Tr. 85, 87-88). He does not 
currently attend any Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous meetings (Tr. 85).  
 
Falsification of Security Clearance Applications 
 
On November 17, 2006, Applicant signed his SF 86 (SOR ¶ 2.a; Tr. 59-60; GE 
1). On his November 17, 2006 SF 86 he responded, “No” to Section 24a, which asks: 
 
24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity—Illegal Use of Drugs 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?    
 
Applicant’s response to Section 24a on his November 17, 2006 SF 86 was 
deliberately false. He provided misleading information about his marijuana use because 
he was worried about keeping his employment (Tr. 60). He thought if he was truthful he 
would not receive a security clearance and consequently would lose his job (Tr. 61).3  
 
On February 12, 2007, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
questioned Applicant about his marijuana use. Applicant did not accurately disclose his 
most recent marijuana use to the OPM investigator. Applicant falsely stated that his 
most recent marijuana use was in early 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.e).  
 
On November 1, 2007, in response to two DOHA interrogatories about his most 
recent marijuana use, Applicant said he, “used experimentally in college,” and it had 
 
3Applicant did not disclose his 1995 attendance at ASAP or his 1995 marijuana possession 
conviction on his 2006 SF 86 (Tr. 63-65). The SOR does not allege that Applicant failed to disclose this 
information. Applicant did not disclose the ASAP attendance because he did not believe it to be therapy 
or counseling, and he thought there was a seven-year time limit to the requirement to disclose his 1995 
conviction (Tr. 62-64; GE 3 at 6). He did not think there was a seven-year time limit on disclosing his 
marijuana use (Tr. 64). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
been “years, can’t remember” since his last marijuana use (SOR ¶ 2.f; GE 2 at 5; GE 
10). As indicated previously, he was well aware that his most recent marijuana use was 
on two occasions in December 2006. 
 
On July 1, 2008, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant revealed his 
marijuana use in December 2006 and admitted he falsified his security clearance 
documentation out of a “survival instinct” (GE 4 at 2-3, 4). However, Applicant was not 
completely candid in this statement because he understated his marijuana use in 
college, stating his marijuana use was “a few times a year” (GE 4 at 2).  
 
At his hearing Applicant emphasized that he was very sorry about lying to the 
government (Tr. 16, 106-107). He lied out of a sense of “self-preservation of [his] job 
and reputation” (Tr. 19). Applicant said he felt deep regret, guilt and shame because of 
his poor decisions (Tr. 19-21) and he explained: 
 
You know, I’ve made poor decisions, I know that, but obviously being 
dishonest about those things, you know, one lie begets another, you 
know, I’ve definitely, I’ve fallen into that bear trap obviously. I obviously 
can’t argue [with] what’s in black and white in front of me. So there’s no 
question about that. 
 
 (Tr. 106). Applicant promised to do better in the future (Tr. 107). 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor (S) has known Applicant for about 30 months (Tr. 33-34). 
S is a Captain in the reserves and he has held a clearance for 22 years (Tr. 35). S has 
been a unit commander three times (Tr. 35). S described Applicant as a consummate 
professional (Tr. 34). Applicant is diligent, reliable, trustworthy and responsible (Tr. 34-
35). When Applicant had access to classified information, he was very conscientious 
(Tr. 34-35). In October 2007 and February 2009, Applicant was employee of the month 
(Tr. 35). Applicant is an important asset to the Army and the Department of Defense (Tr. 
38). He strongly recommends reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance (Tr. 38). If 
Applicant loses his clearance, his employment will be terminated (Tr. 37).  
 
Applicant described himself as a very hard worker, trustworthy, honorable, 
patriotic, dedicated and reliable with high integrity (Tr. 17, 26-27). He has a very strong 
work ethic (Tr. 23). He emphasized his professionalism and his desire to continue to 
assist in the nation’s defense through supporting the Army (Tr. 23). In the last 30 
months, he was only late for work once and that was because he was in a car accident 
(Tr. 23). He was the only employee in an office of 50 persons, who received employee 
of the month twice (Tr. 23). He loves his job (Tr. 23, 26). His positive relationship with 
his peers at work is also very important to him (Tr. 23). He is a team player. He is very 
proud of his contributions to the United States on active duty and subsequently as a 
government contractor (Tr. 26).  
 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an Applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Four drug involvement disqualifying conditions could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “any drug 
abuse,”4 “testing positive for illegal drug use,” “illegal drug possession or sale or 
distribution,” and “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
    
AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), 25(c) and 25(g) apply. The other disqualifying conditions 
listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable. These disqualifying conditions apply because 
Applicant used, possessed, and distributed marijuana.5 He fully disclosed his drug 
abuse in his SOR response and at his hearing. He possessed marijuana before he used 
 
4AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
5AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Sch. I (c)(9). See also Gonzales v. 
Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
it. After he was convicted of marijuana possession in 1995, he tested positive for the 
presence of the marijuana metabolite in his urine. Applicant’s interim Secret security 
clearance was approved on November 27, 2006, and he used marijuana twice in 
December 2006 after his security clearance was granted.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”6 
 
Applicant’s extensive marijuana use lasted approximately seven or eight years 
(1993 to 1998 and from November 2003 to December 2006), and involved numerous 
uses of marijuana. However, Applicant’s last marijuana use was in December 2006, 
about 26 months prior to his hearing. He recognizes the adverse impact on his life of 
drug abuse. These actions create some certitude that he will continue to abstain from 
drug use. AG ¶ 26(a) applies to his marijuana-related offenses.7    
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has somewhat disassociated from his drug-using 
associates and contacts. He has broken his patterns of drug abuse, and he has 
changed his life with respect to illegal drug use. He has abstained from drug abuse for 
about 26 months. However, he did not provide “a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.”8 AG ¶ 26(b) does not fully apply.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. The 
marijuana was never prescribed for him. He receives partial credit because he 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
7In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
8Even though he did not provide such a statement, sufficient time has elapsed since his most 
recent illegal drug use, to warrant full mitigation of security concerns relating to his drug involvement. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
satisfactorily completed a prescribed drug/alcohol treatment program after his DUI in 
2006; however, he cannot receive full credit because he did not provide “a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional, including rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements.” 
  
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in December 2006, about 26 
months ago. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. He understands the 
adverse results from drug abuse.9 He has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track 
record of no drug abuse to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to 
classified information.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process 
the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
 
(d)(3) a pattern of dishonesty violations.10 
 
9Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
10The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use from November 2003 to December 
2006 on his 2006 SF 86 (SOR ¶ 1.a). On February 12, 2007, he lied to an OPM 
investigator, when he failed to disclose that his most recent marijuana was in December 
2006 (SOR ¶ 2.e). On November 1, 2007, he provided false information in response to 
a DOHA interrogatory, when failed to disclose that his most recent marijuana was in 
December 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.f). AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b) and 16(d)(3) all apply. 
 
With respect to the personal conduct concerns involving Applicant’s marijuana 
use after being granted a clearance (SOR ¶ 2.b), 2006 DUI (SOR ¶ 2.c), and citation for 
walking a dog not on a leash (SOR ¶ 2.d), the pertinent disqualifying conditions are AG 
¶ 16(d)(3), a pattern of rule violations and AG ¶ 16(e)(1), which states, “personal 
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if 
known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.” 
Certainly, Applicant’s 2006 excessive alcohol consumption-related DUI, criminal 
conduct and marijuana use while holding a security clearance violate important civil and 
criminal rules in our society, and a history of such problems is conduct a person might 
wish to conceal, as it adversely affects a person’s professional and community standing. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” 
applies to Applicant’s marijuana use after being granted a clearance, 2006 DUI, and 
citation for walking a dog not on a leash. Applicant’s supervisor and most importantly, 
security officials are well aware of Applicant’s problems. Applicant has taken the 
positive step of disclosure, eliminating any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or 
duress. I do not believe Applicant would compromise national security to avoid public 
disclosure of these problems. Any personal conduct security concerns pertaining to his 
marijuana use after being granted a clearance, his 2006 DUI, and his citation for 
walking a dog not on a leash are dealt with more thoroughly under the specific, pertinent 
guidelines. For example, drug use is best addressed under the drug involvement 
guideline in this decision. The personal conduct concerns related to his problems are 
well known to the government.   
 
Applicant deserves substantial credit in the whole person analysis for candidly 
admitting he falsified these documents in order to continue his employment. I found 
Applicant’s statements at the hearing and in his SOR response about his marijuana use 
and his reason for falsifying his security documents to be credible. However, the 
personal conduct concerns pertaining to Applicant’s falsification of his 2006 security 
clearance application (SOR ¶ 1.a); his February 12, 2007, lie to an OPM investigator 
(SOR ¶ 1.e); and his November 1, 2007, misleading answer to a DOHA interrogatory 
(SOR ¶ 2.f) about the extent and/or recency of his marijuana use; cannot be mitigated 
at this time because they are too serious and too recent.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when he began using marijuana. He honorably 
served his country as a U.S. Marine for four and a half years, rising to the rank of 
Sergeant. He did not use illegal drugs while serving on active duty. He then returned to 
using marijuana; however, he again stopped using illegal drugs in December 2006. He 
showed he has the ability to abstain from marijuana use for lengthy periods of time. In 
his SOR response and at his hearing, he frankly and candidly admitted his extensive 
history of marijuana use. He received some alcohol/drug counseling and therapy. He 
knows the consequences of drug abuse and excessive alcohol consumption. Applicant 
contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. There is no evidence of 
disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. His character and good 
work performance show some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. His 
supervisors evidently support him or he would not have been able to retain his 
employment after his security clearance was called into question. His supervisor lauds 
his hard work and dedication. I am satisfied that if he continues to abstain from drug 
use, and avoids future offenses he will eventually have future potential for access to 
classified information.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant’s extensive marijuana use lasted approximately seven or eight years (1993 to 
1998 and 2003 to 2006), and involved numerous uses of marijuana. He had a DUI in 
2006. He received some alcohol/drug counseling or treatment; however, he did not 
provide documentation showing a positive prognosis. His numerous decisions to 
possess and use marijuana and to drive while intoxicated were knowledgeable, 
voluntary, and intentional. Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use from 2004 to 
2006 on his 2006 SF 86. On February 12, 2007, he lied to an OPM investigator, when 
he failed to disclose that his most recent marijuana was in December 2006. On 
November 1, 2007, he provided false information in response to a DOHA interrogatory, 
when he failed to disclose that his most recent marijuana was in December 2006. He 
was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. These offenses show a 
serious lack of judgment and a failure to abide by the law. Such judgment lapses are 
relevant in the context of security requirements. His misconduct raises a serious 
security concern, and a security clearance is not warranted at this time.  
 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct; however, he has fully 
mitigated drug involvement primarily because his illegal marijuana use is not recent.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”11 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b to 2.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.e to 2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
11See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
