  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12672 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has twelve past due accounts totaling more than $19,000. He has paid 
less than $50 on the debts. Additionally, he did not give honest answers when 
completing his security clearance applications. Applicant has not successfully mitigated 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 14, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, based on a history of financial problems as 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
evicenced by delinquent debts and Guideline E, personal conduct, for falsified material 
on security clearance questionnaires. The SOR was amended on November 12, 2008 
alleging additional falsification. 
  
 On August 18, 2008, and September 11, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. On December 15, 2008, I was assigned the case. On January 5, 
2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on January 22, 
2009. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 15, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and did not submit documents. The 
record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On January 29, 
2009, documents were received. There being no objection, the material was admitted 
into evidence as Ex. A. On February 3, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the record, case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 48 years old and is 
employed by a cleaning service, a defense contractor since August 2004, and is 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. Applicant lives with his mother and provides 
child support for his two sons, ages 13 and 17. (Ex. 6) He has not taken a day off from 
work in five years. (Tr. 32)  
 
 In 1990, Applicant and his wife married. While married, both Applicant and his 
wife worked. In the divorce, Applicant’s wife got the home and Applicant got his clothes 
and the debts. (Tr. 79) There were two step-children of the marriage, a step-daughter 
now age 23 and a step-son age 22. There were two sons born of the marriage, one age 
18 and the other age 14. In 1994, twins, a son and a daughter, were born to Applicant 
and his wife. The daughter died. (Tr. 82) Applicant’s wife never got over the loss. The 
marriage suffered. In October 2004, she moved out and in October 2006, they were 
divorced. (Ex. 7) He rarely has contact with his ex-wife. (Tr. 69)  
 
 In January 1999, a charge of making communications in an annoying/alarming 
manner was dismissed. (Ex. 4) Between 2000 and 2004, Applicant was arrested five 
times. (Tr. 72) In March 2002, Applicant was charged with aggravated assault, criminal 
restraint injury risk, criminal sexual contact, false imprisonment, and criminal mischief 
with damage. (Ex. 4, 5) Applicant and his wife were having an argument. His wife 
claimed he made unwanted sexual advances toward her, which he denied. In May 
2002, he pleaded guilty to making communications in annoying/alarming manner, the 
remaining charges were dismissed. (Tr. 63) He was fined $375. (Ex. 4, 7)  
 
 In March 2003, he was charged with theft of services. (Ex. 3, 4) The charge was 
later dismissed. Applicant does not know what this is about. In April 2003, he was 
charged with attempt to cause/knowingly bodily injury to another. (Ex. 4) He was 
arrested, taken to the police station, and fingerprinted. (Tr. 67) This charge was 
dismissed. In May 2003, he was charged with simple assault. (Ex. 3, 5) This charge was 
dismissed. Applicant was involved in a verbal domestic dispute with his wife. Applicant 
was attempting to leave the area when his wife blocked his movement. He pushed his 
 
 
 
3
wife and she hit her head. (Ex. 5) Applicant has never struck his ex-wife. (Tr. 62) After 
the dispute, Applicant moved out of the home and into his own apartment. (Ex.7)  
 
 In August 2004, Applicant moved out of his home and rented an apartment at 
$600 per month. His 20 year old step-daughter moved into the apartment when he 
attempted to reconcile with his wife. (Tr. 70) He attempted to return to the apartment 
when the reconciliation failed. His step-daughter refused to vacate the apartment and 
an argument ensued. (Ex. 7) He was arrested and charged with endangering the 
welfare of a child even though his step-daughter was not a minor. (Ex. 5) In November 
2004, he pleaded guilty to making communications in an annoying/alarming manner and 
was fined $395. (Ex. 3, 4, Tr.71) 
 
Two to three months later, his step-daughter left the apartment, the rent went 
unpaid, and a $4,471 debt was incurred. (Ex. 10, p 48, 50, Ex. 11) The debt remains 
unpaid. Applicant has not spoken to anyone at the apartment complex in years. (Tr. 41)  
 
  In May 2005, he was charged with theft of services. (Ex. 4) The charge was 
dismissed and he was ordered to pay $33 in costs. Again, Applicant has no knowledge 
about this incident. 
 
 Applicant has a number of delinquent accounts on which no payment has been 
made. The SOR lists 12 delinquent accounts on which more than $19,000 is owed. 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card debt of $329, which appears on his November 2007 credit 
bureau report (CBR) and January 2009 CBR. (Ex. 9, 15) In January 2009, Applicant 
contacted the creditor and agreed to pay $10 per month on the debt. (Tr. 35) There is 
no documentation of money having been sent to this creditor. (Tr. 36) SOR ¶ 1.b is a 
collection company attempting to collect a $250 medical bill. Applicant states he has 
had no contact with the collection firm and does not know the nature of the debt. (Tr. 37, 
89) Applicant’s October 2006 (CBR) lists the account as being in dispute. (Ex. 10, p. 43) 
 
 Applicant claims the $734 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d is his ex-wife’s credit card 
account. The debt appears on his October 2006 CBR (Ex. 10, p. 46) and his January 
2009 CBR. (Ex. 15) Three years ago, before he left the family home, he was making 
$25 to $30 monthly payments on this debt. (Ex. 7) He remembers receiving letters 
stating the account was delinquent. (Tr. 49) A credit collection firm is attempting to 
collect two accounts (SOR ¶ 1.e, $846 and SOR ¶ 1.g, $448). (Ex. 10, p. 44, 46, 50) 
Applicant claims, but offers no documentation, that both accounts are the same account 
and are for this ex-wife’s credit card (SOR ¶ 1.d) just referenced. He was asked about 
these accounts during his December 2006 interview, at which time he speculated the 
debts may have been the same debt. (Ex. 7) Two debts ($426 and $846) appear on his 
November 2007 CBR. (Ex. 9) A $476 debt appears on his January 2009 CBR. (Ex. 15)  
 
 The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.f is a credit card account ($498), which was listed on 
Applicant’s CBR as being in “good standing.” (Ex. 10, p. 47) The same creditor of the 
$417 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.h, appears three times on his CBR. (Ex. 10) One entry lists 
a $426 charge-off, another entry lists a $460 charge-off, and one account is listed as 
 
 
 
4
being in good standing. (Ex. 10, p 46-47) The debt appears as a $417 charge-off on his 
January 2009 CBR (Ex. 15) Applicant has no knowledge about this debt. (Tr. 90)  
 
 In March 1999, Applicant and his wife purchased a Ford van for $12,593 with 
$329 monthly payments. In October 2003, the van broke down and was repossessed. 
The creditor charged-off $8,424. (Ex. 7, 10, p. 47, Ex. 12) Applicant asserts his then-
wife failed to forward him any mail addressed to him after he moved from the home. 
However, the van was repossessed in October 2003 and he moved out in August 2004. 
Applicant asserts, but provided no documentation, that in November 2006 the creditor 
offered to settle this debt for $3,000. (Ex. 7) In February 2004, the creditor obtained a 
judgment against him. (Tr. 50)  
 
 Applicant can not explain the $42 returned check debt (Ex. 10) listed in SOR ¶ 
1.j. (Tr. 55, 92) He disputes the $199 debt (SOR ¶ 1.k) from a collection agency 
collecting for the county library. (Ex. 10, p. 49, 50) Applicant has no knowledge about 
this debt. (Tr. 56) Applicant has another credit card not listed as of concern in the SOR 
that is also delinquent. (Tr. 57)  
 
 In December 2005, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In response to question 27, he responded “no” when 
asked if during the previous seven years he was more than 90 days delinquent on any 
debt. Applicant can not explain his answer and says it was an error. (Tr. 47) On the 
same form, he failed to list that property had been repossessed and a judgment entered 
against him. The judgment was entered approximately one year before he completed 
his e-QIP. (Tr. 53) Applicant thought of the repossession as his ex-wife’s repossession 
and not his. (Tr. 53)  
 
In October 2006, Applicant completed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions, Standard Form (SF) 86. (Ex. 1) In response to question 28, he responded 
“no” when asked if during the last seven years he had ever been more than 180 days 
delinquent on any debt. Applicant believes he read the question, but failed to read it 
properly. (Tr. 46)  
 
In his October 2006 SF 86, Applicant also failed to list his criminal charges. At 
the hearing, Applicant stated he did not know why he completed his questionnaires as 
he did. Applicant admitted the material was not on his SF 86, but denied he intentionally 
omitted the material. (Tr. 17) In a December 2006 interview, Applicant stated he did not 
list his criminal history on his July 2004 SF 86 because he was found not guilty of all 
charges. (Ex. 7) At the hearing, he stated he thought there was no charge if the action 
was dismissed. He also stated he thought he had to list only felonies. (Tr. 63)  
  
 In January 2008, Applicant stated he had contacted some of his creditors and 
was attempting to settle his debts. (Ex. 8) In August 2008, Applicant stated he had been 
in contact with a few of his creditors and was waiting to start paying them. (Ex. 6) He 
stated he was unaware of all his debts when he completed his questionnaires. 
Applicant’s states some of his creditors are still sending him debt notices. (Tr. 96)  
 
 
 
 
5
 Applicant’s yearly gross income is $39,000. (Tr. 29) As of December 2006, 
Applicant’s monthly gross income is $2,772 and his disposable income (gross income 
less $1,144 expenses) was $1,628. (Ex. 7) He pays $802 per month for child support, 
which is automatically deducted from his pay. (Tr. 60) He is current on his child support. 
(Tr. 61) Expenses include: $400 in rent, $100 for the cable bill, $300 for groceries, and 
$150 for a cell phone. (Tr. 28, 31) He has no car expense. (Tr. 28) In January 2008, 
Applicant provided a monthly budget showing gross monthly income of $2,938, net 
monthly income of $1,491 (which includes the child support deduction), and $850 in 
monthly expenses. The net remainder was $641, which includes no payment to his 
creditors on the debts listed in the SOR. (Ex. 6, 8) As of January 2009, Applicant was 
receiving $1,538 gross pay every two weeks. (Ex. A)  
 
The week before the hearing, Applicant contacted a consumer credit service 
about establishing a repayment plan with his creditors. Following the hearing, Applicant 
stated the credit service had contacted his creditors and had requested statement from 
them. He provided no documentation as to his arrangement with the credit service, the 
details of the repayment plan, or the debts included in a repayment plan. Applicant 
provided documents showing he had made two payments to creditors of $21 and $22. 
(Ex. A)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
 
 
6
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
7
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his 
SOR response, his response to interrogatories, and his testimony. Applicant has 12 
delinquent debs, totaling more than $19,000. Following the hearing, he made two 
payments which total less than $50. Applicant has provided insufficient documentation 
to show significant progress resolving his debts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by his 
divorce and by his step-daughter refusing to leave an apartment he had rented. 
Applicant now lives with his mother. It is unlikely such an apartment debt would recur. 
However, the debts remain unpaid and cast doubt on Applicants current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experience both separation and divorce along with 
the financial burden associated with each. AG & 20(b) has limited applicability. The 
divorce occurred more than two years ago—in October 2006. Applicant was questioned 
about his debts in December 2006 and received the SOR in July 2007. Even knowing of 
the government’s concern over his unpaid debts, Applicant has shown evidence he has 
paid less than $50 on his past due obligations. Under the circumstances, Applicant has 
not acted responsibility.  
 
 
 
 
8
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), Applicant has entered into an agreement to pay 
$10 on one of the debts, but has yet to show proof he has made the first payment. 
There is no showing he has attended financial classes or maintains a budget. His 
monthly disposable income is $641 and his delinquent debts total more than $19,000. 
AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant stated he disputed some of his obligations. In 2006, he stated he 
believed some of the debts were duplicates. However, he provided no documentation 
supporting his assertion. Nor did he provide any documentation supporting his dispute. 
AG & 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline E, personal conduct, the concern is conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. AG ¶ 15. 
 
When completing his December 2005 e-QIP and his October 2006 SF 86 he 
failed to indicate he was delinquent on his debts. He knew his van had been 
repossessed. He also knew he had delinquent debts. He stated he did not intentionally 
provide false information, but could not explain his answers on the forms. Additionally, 
between 2000 and 2004, he had been arrested five times, some of which involved going 
to the police station and being fingerprinted. Yet he failed to provide his criminal history 
on his SF 86 when it asked if he had ever been “arrested.” 
 
Due to the nature of his debts and criminal history Applicant should have 
disclosed both. AG ¶ 16 (a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities” applies.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply to his false answers. He did not make a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the falsification before being confronted by the facts, 
the concealment was not caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice, or so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Additionally, it 
occurred on more than one questionnaire and in response to more than one question. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
 
 
9
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The largest two debts were for a 
repossessed vehicle ($11,206) and past due rent on an apartment ($4,471). These two 
debts represent 80% of Applicant’s past due obligations. They remain unpaid and 
Applicant has not had recent contact with either creditor. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old and sufficiently mature to make prudent decisions about 
his finances. Although his intent to resolve his financial problems appears to be 
genuine, he has done little to demonstrate that intent. What is missing is: (1) a realistic 
and workable plan to address his financial problems, (2) documented actions taken in 
furtherance of the plan, and (3) a measurable improvement in the situation. Given the 
current circumstances, it is likely that the financial problems will continue. Additionally, 
he should have given truthful answers on his questionnaires when asked about his 
finances and criminal record. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
and personal conduct.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a- 1.l  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
10
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
