 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-13240 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding criminal activity and personal 
conduct.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2007, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On November 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive). The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
It should be noted that on December 29, 2005, the President promulgated 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information, and on August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) 
published a memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s 
case because his SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 28, 2008. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated that same day, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations 
and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel indicated 
the Government was prepared to proceed on December 8, 2008, and the case was 
assigned to Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul on December 12, 2008. It was 
reassigned to me on January 23, 2009, due to caseload considerations. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on February 2, 2009, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on 
February 11, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, five Government exhibits and two Applicant exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) was received on February 19, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d., and 1.a. and 1.b.).  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain a SECRET security clearance.  He currently holds an interim clearance. Applicant 
has never been married.1 He has been gainfully employed by the same defense 
contractor since March 2007, and currently serves as a mechanic.2 His employment 
history since 1999 includes various periods of unemployment (January-April 2001, 
August 2001-February 2002, June 2002-January 2003, April 2003-April 2004, 
December 2004-November 2005, and January-March 2007).3  
 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP, dated April 26, 2007), at 25. 
 
2 Id. at 11. 
 
3 Id. at 12-13, 15, 17-18, 20-21. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
e a month.   
                                                          
Criminal Conduct  
 
Applicant was a substance abuser whose choice of substances was alcohol, 
marijuana, and methamphetamines (“speed”).  He was a frequent consumer of alcohol 
from the time he was in high school, during 1980-81, sometimes while with friends and 
sometimes alone, until about 2003.4  He would consume limited amounts of alcohol on 
weekends, and get intoxicated two or three times per year.5 He estimated it would take 
six beers or mixed drinks for him to become intoxicated.6 Applicant’s excessive 
consumption of alcohol diminished substantially in 2003 after he was diagnosed with 
diabetes.7 Since that time, he no longer goes to bars, and limits his alcohol 
consumption to one or two beers at a time, once or twic 8
 
His drug use started earlier while in high school, during 1977-81, when he started 
experimenting9 with marijuana and methamphetamines,10 and continued until about 
2003, when it ceased forever.11 He considered his drug abuse to be recreational, and 
occasionally would use those substances, at most once a month, either alone or with 
friends.12 There were also periods of four or five months at a time when he did not use 
any drugs.13 He attributed some of his substance abuse to peer pressure,14 depression, 
and being upset over certain past incidents.15 
 
During the period from July 1992 through March 2001, Applicant was arrested 
three times for substance-related activities.  In October 1993, after smoking marijuana 
with a friend, Applicant was upset over not being paid for some work he had done, and 
decided to ride his bicycle to get a beer and cool off. He was stopped by police for 
unknown reasons.16  For some unexplained reason, Applicant attempted to flee, and 
4 Government Exhibit 2 (Interrogatories and answers to interrogatories, dated October 27, 2008) at 4. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 Tr. at 76. 
 
9 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
10 Id. at 10; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 34. 
 
11 Tr. at 46, 56. 
 
12 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 4, at 4. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Tr. at 57. 
 
15 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 4, at 4. 
 
16 Id. at 9. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
the officer threw a flashlight to stop him.17 A search of Applicant incident to the arrest, 
revealed an amount of marijuana, a pipe for smoking marijuana,18 and a 3.5 to 4 inch 
long folding double-edged buck knife,19 characterized by the police as a “dangerous 
weapon,”20 and by Applicant as a “pocket knife.”21  He was charged with (1) possession 
of a dangerous weapon (the knife), a felony; (2) possession of less than 28.5 grams of 
marijuana; and (3) resisting arrest.22 The 2nd charge was amended to possession of 
controlled substance paraphernalia.  The 1st charge was dismissed; the 2nd charge was 
suspended and he was sent to a drug diversion program. He was convicted of the 3rd 
charge and sentenced to 12 months probation and 2 days in jail. The diversion term 
was successful and the charge was eventually dismissed.23 
 
In February 1997, after consuming alcohol at a bar with a friend, Applicant got 
behind the wheel of his truck and was driving home when one wheel drifted slightly off 
the road and the friend grabbed the wheel, causing an over-correction.  The truck rolled 
and ended up in a field.  Applicant was unhurt, but his friend sustained minor injuries 
and was transported to the hospital.24 Applicant admitted he was intoxicated, and was 
administered a blood test. His blood-alcohol level registered 0.15 or 0.16 percent.25 He 
was charged with (1) driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI); and DUI causing 
bodily injury. He was subsequently convicted of the 1st charge and the 2nd charge was 
dismissed in the furtherance of justice.  He was sentenced to 2 days time served in jail, 
3 years probation, a substantial fine, and ordered to attend a first offender’s DUI 
program.26  He successfully completed his probation and all required counseling.27 
 
In March 2001, after consuming alcohol at a bar alone, followed by an 
unspecified period of additional drinking alone in his car, Applicant became, by his own 
admission, intoxicated.28 He subsequently drove around searching for female 
companionship.  He solicited a date with a woman who, unfortunately for Applicant, 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. at 9-10. 
 
19 Tr. at 80. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 3 (County Sheriff Master File, various dates), at 6. 
 
21 Tr. at 51, 80. 
 
22 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 20, at 6. 
 
23 Applicant Exhibit A (State Department of Justice Record Review, dated July 17, 2008), at 2. 
 
24 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 4, at 4. 
 
25 Id. 
 
26 Id.; Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 23, at 3; Government Exhibit 5 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
Identification Record, dated May 13, 2007), at 3. 
 
27 Tr. at 49. 
 
28 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
turned out to be a police officer.29  He was arrested, transported to jail, where he 
remained for nearly 2 days, and charged with (1) possession of a controlled substance, 
a felony; and (2) disorderly conduct: prostitution.30 The controlled substance found in 
his car was methamphetamine.31 He was subsequently convicted of the 2nd charge, and 
sentenced to 24 months probation, a fine, and 3 days (apparently reduced to time 
served) in jail.32 It is unclear if the remaining charge was dismissed, for there is no court 
disposition other than “further investigation,” listed in the evidence.33 
 
In July 1992, according to SOR & 1.d., Applicant was purportedly arrested and 
charged with robbery, a felony.34 The charge was subsequently dismissed for lack of 
evidence.35 Applicant denied the allegation and disputed the arrest, contending he was 
never arrested for robbery, and claimed the evidence of such arrest is erroneous.36  No 
further evidence is known about this alleged arrest, and, interestingly, it is not listed in 
his FBI Identification Record.37 
 
In July 2004, Applicant decided to relocate from the state where he had 
previously gotten into trouble. He had become tired of everything that was going on 
around him, including the wrong crowd with whom he was hanging around, the peer 
pressure to do things he shouldn’t be doing, the trouble it had caused, and the 
heartache caused his family.38 As a result, the changes have brought about a positive 
attitude and outlook, as well as reduced peer pressure, and he no longer hangs out with 
the wrong crowd.39 Since the move, he has had no unfavorable involvement with law 
enforcement.40 Moreover, he has vowed never to use illegal substances again,41 and 
because of his diabetes, has substantially decreased his alcohol consumption. The 
29 Id. 
 
30 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 20, at 7. 
 
31 Tr. at 44. 
 
32 Government Exhibit 4 (Court Records, various dates), at 1, 12; Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 23, at 3. 
 
33 Id. (Applicant Exhibit A). 
 
34 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 20, at 3. 
 
35 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 23, at 2. 
 
36 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 4, at 10; Tr. at 53. 
 
37 See Government Exhibit 5, supra note 26. 
 
38 Tr. at 39, 46, 57. 
 
39 Id. at 57. 
 
40 Id. at 56. 
 
41 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 4, at 10. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
change in lifestyle has also had a positive impact on his professional career, for in June 
2008, he was promoted by his employer.42 
 
Falsification of Security Clearance Applications  
 
As noted above, in April 2007, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an e-QIP version of a Security Clearance Application. At that time, Applicant 
was with a small group of new hires and they received a very cursory oral instruction on 
how to complete a questionnaire.43 He cannot recall any written instructions,44 and 
aside from the form itself, there is no evidence of any such instructions. Seeking 
additional guidance on completing some responses, Applicant turned to a colleague, not 
the facility security officer, and was advised to only go back for seven years.45 Applicant 
filled out the questionnaire in long hand, without the benefit of any records, relying 
solely on his memory.46 He signed the questionnaire and submitted it, but did not 
complete the form on a computer, and does not know who did so.47 In fact, until he 
received a copy of the e-QIP from Department Counsel, he had never seen the 
computerized version, a copy of which is in evidence.48  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose two aspects of his 
police record in Section 23 thereof.  The SOR & 2.a. refers to question 23.d. (Have you 
ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?). 
There is no modifier to that particular question which would limit the reportable period to 
anything less than “ever.”49 Applicant answered “Yes” to the question and described the 
incidents from SOR && 1.a. (2001 - drugs) and 1.b. (1997 - alcohol).50 He did not 
mention the incident from SOR & 1.c.  (1993 – drugs).  The Government argues the 
omission of that incident was made deliberately by Applicant, but he denies his 
omission was deliberate or with intent to falsify his police record.  He contends he was 
in a rush to complete the information, and “did so to the best of [his] ability and what [he] 
could recall,51 did not have the exact dates and times of past offenses,52 and was under 
42 Applicant Exhibit B (Employer Correspondence, dated June 21 and 24, 2008), at 1. 
 
43 Tr. at 59, 68. 
 
44 Id. at 68. 
 
45 Id. at 59-60. 
 
46 Id. at 34-35, 63, 65, 69-70. 
 
47 Id. at 71-72. 
 
48 Id. 
 
49 It should be noted, however, that questions 23.e. and 23.f. do contain such modifiers.  See Government 
Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 32. 
 
50 Id. at 31-33. 
 
51 Tr. at 34. 
 
52 Id. at 35. 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
the erroneous impression that he was only supposed to list incidents within the past 
seven years.53 After reviewing the e-QIP during the hearing, and upon further reflection, 
Applicant conceded that he “messed up” in failing to include the other incident.54 While 
Applicant clearly omitted the incident, I find his explanations to be reasonable, and can 
find no substantial benefit to have been gained by deliberately omitting the oldest 
incident when he had already admitted the two most recent incidents and they covered 
both alcohol and drugs.  Accordingly, I find Applicant is credible in his denial of 
“deliberate falsification.” 
 
The SOR & 2.b. refers to question 23.a. (Have you ever been charged with or 
convicted of any felony offense?). Applicant answered “No” to the question.55 He did not 
mention the incidents from SOR & 1.c.  (1993 – dangerous weapon) or SOR & 1.d. 
(1992 – robbery).  The Government again argues the omissions of those incidents were 
made deliberately by Applicant, but he again denies these omissions were deliberate or 
with intent to falsify his police record, and contends, in addition to his other 
explanations, that he was under the impression that the question referred to “felony 
convictions.”56 While Applicant clearly omitted the incidents, I again find his 
explanations, including the one that he was not aware of any “felony convictions,” to be 
reasonable. Moreover, as far as SOR & 1.d. is concerned, Applicant consistently 
disputed the occurrence of the 1992 arrest for robbery, and the FBI Identification 
Record does not list it. Applicant’s erroneous impressions may be wrong, but that is not 
evidence of deliberate falsification. I find Applicant is credible in his denial of “deliberate 
falsification.” 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”57 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”58   
 
 
 
53 I recognize he disclosed the 1997 incident which occurred more than seven years previously. Id. at 59. 
 
54 Id. at 35. 
 
55 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 31-32. 
 
56 Tr. at 63-64. 
 
57 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
58 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”59 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.60  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”61 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”62 Thus, nothing 
59 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
60 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
61 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
62 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
9 
                                      
 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), an Aallegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,@ may raise security concerns. Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, 
involving at least three arrests and three convictions, is documented in his police and 
court records, his answers to interrogatories, and the evidence, including his testimony, 
presented during the hearing. The Government has established AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ In addition, when there is “evidence that the person did not commit the 
offense,” AG ¶ 32(c) may apply. Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.@  
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply because Applicant’s alleged criminal conduct (the 
2001 arrest) last occurred approximately eight years ago and there has been no further 
alleged criminal conduct. His illegal substance abuse ceased in 2003, and his 
abstinence has continued for about six years since then. He has clearly exhibited 
remorse, and since turning his life around and avoiding the wrong crowd, he has 
established a good employment record with constructive community involvement. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
As far as AG ¶ 32(c), it is really unclear if Applicant was arrested for robbery, for 
while he denies the arrest, county police records claim that he was, but FBI records 
record no such arrest. I carefully viewed his demeanor and am satisfied that he was not 
arrested for robbery in 1992.  This particular criminal offense is unsubstantiated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative,” may raise security concerns. Applicant’s omissions of critical 
information pertaining to arrests, provides sufficient evidence to examine if his omission 
was a deliberate falsification or was the result of simple oversight or negligence on his 
part.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. Under AG ¶ 17(b), “the refusal or failure to 
cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by 
improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or 
instructing the individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully,” may apply.  In this instance, while Applicant’s 
omissions were not considered to be deliberate attempts to conceal certain arrests, 
there appears to have also been some improper or inadequate advice received which 
misled Applicant. While there is no clear evidence that the advice was from “authorized 
personnel,” regardless of the source, Applicant’s state of mind was partially influenced 
by it.  Accordingly, AG ¶ 17(b) partially applies.  Most importantly, I find that AG ¶ 17(f), 
“the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability,” 
applies. 
 
Based on the evidence, I have already concluded that Applicant credibly stated 
during his hearing that at the time he completed his Security Clearance Application, he 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
did not believe he needed to disclose the information regarding incidents that were 
outside the seven year limit, he was unaware that he had been convicted of a felony, 
and he was never arrested for robbery. I find Applicant is credible in his denial of 
deliberate falsification.63 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and E in my analysis below.      
 
While in high school, Applicant started hanging around with the wrong crowd and 
developed bad habits. In part, due to peer pressure, he consumed alcohol, sometimes 
to excess, and abused marijuana and methamphetamines. That substance abuse 
eventually resulted in some arrests. While some of the charges were dismissed, he was 
convicted several times and punished. Some of the sentences included probation, 
participation in certain rehabilitation or education programs, and brief periods of 
incarceration. 
 
As bad as things had become, with his 2001 arrest, they took a turn for the 
better, and there has been no further negative involvement with law enforcement 
authorities since that time. Furthermore, in 2003, he decided to abstain from further 
drug abuse and significantly diminished his alcohol consumption. In July 2004, 
Applicant relocated from the state where he had previously gotten into trouble. He 
63 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
12 
                                      
 
turned his back on the old crowd and shed his bad habits, and developed a new life and 
lifestyle. The changes have brought about a positive attitude and outlook. Now, there is 
little potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress, and the likelihood of 
recurrence is nil. The change in lifestyle has also had a positive impact on his 
professional career. 
 
It is true that Applicant made poor choices, but those activities occurred in 2001 
and before, and have not recurred. Using the analogy from the Appeal Board in financial 
cases, Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of good conduct over the 
past eight years, establishing a new life and lifestyle with positive results. These factors 
show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. (See AG && 2(a)(2), 2(a)(3), 2(a)(5), 
2(a)(6), 2(a)(7), 2(a)(8), and 2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the criminal conduct and 
personal conduct security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
   
 
13 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
