 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18299 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Foreign 
Influence adjudicative guideline. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On October 12, 2006, Applicant executed and certified a Security Clearance 
Application (SF-86). On November 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 On December 17, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. On February 17, 2009, the case was 
assigned to me. I convened a hearing on March 20, 2009, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses, introduced five exhibits (Ex.), and 
offered for administrative notice facts about The Palestinian Territories and the West 
Bank compiled from four official documents of the U.S. Government. (The five-page 
compilation was identified as “Administrative Notice.” The documents from which the 
compilation was drawn were marked HE I through IV and included in the record.)  Ex.1 
through 5 were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and called no witnesses. He offered no exhibits. At the conclusion of the hearing, 
I left the record open until close of business April 1, 2009, so that Applicant could, if he 
wished, submit additional documentation for the record. On April 1, 2009, Applicant 
advised that he did not have any post-hearing documents to submit.  DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 27, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG B, Foreign 
Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
four AG B allegations.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the following 
findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old.  He was born and educated in the United States. He 
has earned a Bachelor of Science degree in engineering and a Master of Science 
degree in telecommunications. He seeks a security clearance as a senior information 
security analyst employed by a government contractor.1 He does not, at present, have 
access to classified information. (Ex. 1; Tr. 44-49.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in an area now identified as the West Bank of the 
Palestinian Territories. They immigrated to the United States and became U.S. citizens. 
Applicant and his four sisters were born in the United States. Applicant’s father owned a 
restaurant business.  (Ex.1; Tr. 53-56.) 
 
 In 1990, Applicant’s mother left the United States and returned to live in the West 
Bank with his four sisters. In 1995, Applicant’s father retired from his business in the 
United States and joined his wife and daughters in the West Bank. Applicant’s father, 
mother, and four sisters currently reside in the West Bank.  (Tr. 57-59.)    
 
 
1 Applicant holds a second full-time position as a security operations center engineer with a company 
owed by a foreign entity. The U.S. company which employs Applicant as a federal contractor is 
sponsoring him for a security clearance. (Ex. 4; Tr. 47-48.) 
 
3 
 
 
 In 1999, Applicant traveled to the West Bank to visit his family and to discuss 
marriage with his parents. In 2000, he traveled to the West Bank with his fiancée and 
her family. He and his fiancée were married in the West Bank village where his parents 
live. Applicant’s wife was born in the United States and is a U.S. citizen. Applicant and 
his wife are first cousins. They are the parents of three young children. (Ex. 1; Tr. 41-43, 
50, 52, 94.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to the West Bank in 2001 for the wedding of one of his sisters.  
In 2003, he and his wife traveled to the West Bank to introduce their infant daughter to 
his family. In 2004, Applicant traveled twice to the West Bank for the weddings of two of 
his sisters. In 2007, he traveled to the West Bank to introduce his family to his second 
daughter and his son. He plans to travel to the West Bank in the future to visit his 
parents, sisters, and other family members there. (Tr. 42-43, 65.) 
 
  Applicant’s mother and sisters possess Palestinian identification and travel 
documents.  His father has also applied for and received approval from the Palestinian 
Authority for such documentation.  Applicant’s father, who is retired, collects U.S. social 
security.  Applicant’s mother is not employed outside the home. (Tr. 59, 63-64.) 
 
 Applicant is his parents’ only son. His oldest sister is a teacher. Her husband, 
who is also a teacher, is a citizen and resident of the West Bank. The sister and her 
husband have two children and reside with Applicant’s parents in their home.  
Applicant’s youngest sister is divorced from her husband and also lives with Applicant’s 
parents. Her former husband, a citizen and resident of the West Bank, is also a teacher. 
(Tr. 61, 69-72.) 
 
 Applicant’s third sister lives in a village in the West Bank with her husband and 
son. The husband, a citizen and resident of the West Bank, is a teacher. Applicant’s 
fourth sister is separated from her husband, who lives in the United States. The fourth 
sister lives with Applicant’s parents and is pursuing university studies.  (Tr. 66-67, 75.) 
 
 Applicant possesses a U.S. checking account for the purpose of helping his 
parents with their living expenses. His father’s monthly social security check is 
deposited to the account, enabling Applicant to transfer the social security funds 
electronically to his father in the West Bank. Each month Applicant also provides his 
mother with approximately $300 a month in support.  He estimates that he provides his 
parents and sisters with a total of approximately $5,000 to $6,000 in support each year. 
For U.S. federal income purposes, Applicant claimed his mother and two of his sisters 
as dependents.  (Ex. 4; Tr. 76-77, 96-102.) 
 
   Applicant is close to his parents and his sisters.  He communicates with his 
sisters by e-mail, and he speaks with his parents by telephone once a week.  (Tr. 64, 
75.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about the Palestinian Territories, 
including the West Bank:2 
 
Palestine is a territory, created following World War I, as the result of a 
British mandate. The territory included land that is within the current 
borders of Israel, Jordan, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip. In 1948, the 
British withdrew from the Palestinian Territory and Jews proclaimed an 
independent State of Israel.  Arabs living in the Palestinian territory moved 
to the Egyptian-controlled Gaza Strip, the Jordanian-ruled West Bank, 
Jordan proper, Syria, and Lebanon.  The Palestinian Liberation 
Organization (PLO) was established in 1964[,] and after 1967, became 
more militant, portraying itself as a movement struggling for national 
liberation.  In time, the PLO became recognized by the Palestinian people, 
the Arab states, and much of the international community as the legitimate 
representative of the Palestinian people.  In 1967, Israel took control of the 
Sinai and the Gaza Strip from Egypt, the West Bank and East Jerusalem 
from Jordan, and the Golan Heights from Syria.  The Arabs living within 
this territory came under Israeli rule. The conflict between Arab 
Palestinians and Israel continued throughout the 1960s and 1970s, and 
increased during the 1980s in uprisings called the First Intifada.  In 1988, 
Jordan ceded all Jordanian claims to the territory.  In September 2005, 
Israel completed its unilateral withdrawal from Gaza but still controls the 
flow of people and goods in and out of the territories and continues to 
occupy the West Bank, and has erected hundreds of checkpoints and 
roadblocks to thwart terrorism. 
 
Fatah, a secular nationalist party and the largest faction within the PLO, 
dominated Palestinian society and politics between 1969, when its leader 
Yasir Arafat became PLO chairman, and his death in 2004. In the January 
2006, Palestinian legislative election, an opposition party, Hamas, formed 
a government without Fatah.  Hamas grew out of the Muslim Brotherhood, 
a religious and political organization founded in Egypt in 1928, with 
branches throughout the Arab world. Hamas combines Palestinian 
nationalism with Islamic fundamentalism. Its founding charter commits the 
groups to the destruction of Israel and the establishment of an Islamic 
state in all of historic Palestine. It rejected the Oslo Accords, boycotted the 
1996 elections, and has waged an intermittent terrorist campaign to 
undermine the peace process.  Its military wing, the Izz al-Din al-Quassam 
Brigades, has carried out hundreds of terrorist attacks since 1993. The 
 
2 The facts contained in this summary were provided by Department Counsel and are derived from the 
following documents: Congressional Research Service Report for Congress, The Palestinian Territories: 
Background and U.S. Relations, July 5, 2007; U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices – 2007: Israel and the Occupied Territories, March 11, 2008, revised 2009; U.S. 
Department of State, Travel Warning, Israel, the West Bank and Gaza, January 15, 2009; U.S. 
Department of State, Country Specific Information: Israel, the West Bank and Gaza, February 8, 2008.  
  
 
5 
 
 
U.S. State Department has designated Hamas as a Foreign Terrorist 
Organization (FTO). The U[nited] S[tates] has also designated six other 
Palestinian groups as FTOs. In February 2007, Hamas and Fatah signed 
an agreement to form a national unity government, with Hamas controlling 
the Prime Minister position and nine ministries.  However, in June 2007, 
factional fighting broke out and Hamas took complete control of the Gaza 
Strip. Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and Fatah retained 
control over the West Bank. 
 
The current security situation in the Palestinian Territories is such that the 
United States urges citizens to defer travel to the West Bank and to avoid 
all travel to the Gaza Strip due to threats to American citizens and U.S. 
interests in those locations. All U.S. Government personnel and their 
dependents are prohibited from traveling to any cities, towns or 
settlements in the West Bank, except when they are on mission-essential 
business or are traveling for other mission-approved purposes.  Regarding 
Palestinian Authorities, there were reports of torture, arbitrary and 
prolonged detention, poor prison conditions, insufficient measures to 
prevent terroris[m] and corruption. U.S. citizens, including tourists, 
students, residents, and U.S. mission personnel, have been injured or 
killed by terrorists in Israel, Jerusalem, the West Bank, and Gaza. 
Additionally, in the past, armed gunmen have kidnapped foreigners, 
including several Americans.  Gunmen in negotiations with the Palestinian 
Authority have sometimes used foreign hostages as bartering tools.  The 
threat of hostage-taking remains a primary concern for Americans and 
foreigners within the Gaza Strip.   
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative  judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
6 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶6. 
 
  Applicant’s case requires the recognition that the Palestinian Authority has 
neither prevented nor disavowed terrorist actions hostile to the United States and that 
factions within it support international terrorism.  Additionally, it does not deter internal 
 
7 
 
 
factions that oppose, through violence, U. S. policies such as the Middle East peace 
process and human rights.  These hostile actions by the Palestinian Authority directly 
threaten U.S. security interests.  American citizens with immediate family members who 
are citizens or residents of the West Bank, which is under Palestinian Authority control, 
could be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure.  
 
 I have reviewed the allegations in this case, and I have weighed them against the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under the Foreign Influence guideline. I conclude 
SOR ¶1.c for Applicant, since it does not raise an independent disqualifying condition 
under the guideline but simply supports the security concerns that arise from the 
citizenship and residency of Applicant’s parents and sisters, which are alleged at SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
The facts of this case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(i). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(i) reads: “conduct, especially while 
traveling outside the U.S., which may make an individual vulnerable to exploitation, 
pressure, or coercion by a foreign group, government, or country.” 
 
Applicant has immediate family members who reside in a foreign country.  
Applicant is close to his parents and his four sisters, who are U.S. citizens living in the 
West Bank, and he communicates with them regularly. He owns and manages a U.S. 
bank account to which his father’s monthly social security payments are sent, and he 
regularly sends his mother and sisters money to help them with their living expenses. 
 
 The United States has designated Hamas and six other Palestinian organizations 
as FTOs. The FTOs and their activities create instability and hostility, situations that 
threaten U.S. security interests. The presence of Applicant’s immediate family members 
in the West Bank raises security concerns because their presence there could make 
Applicant vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure by a hostile foreign 
government or by terrorist groups operating in the West Bank. 
 
Applicant has traveled to the West Bank to visit his family at least six times since 
1999. He intends to travel to the West Bank in the future to visit his family members 
living there. Applicant’s parents and sisters also exercise certain indicia of residency in 
the West Bank and utilize Palestinian identification and travel documents.   
 
 Two mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s case.  
If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply. If “contact or communication with 
 
8 
 
 
foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. 
 
 Applicant’s relationship with his father, mother, and four sisters is based on long-
standing family ties of affection and obligation.  Applicant is a dutiful son who looks after 
the welfare of his parents and sisters. He is in frequent contact with them, and they rely 
upon him for their support. Applicant’s parents and sisters have elected to reside in a 
territory that presents serious dangers for U.S. citizens, thereby creating a heightened 
risk that Applicant could be targeted for exploitation, pressure, or coercion by individuals 
or groups in the West Bank who might also threaten U.S. security interests. Applicant 
travels to the West Bank regularly to visit his family members. Applicant failed to provide 
information to rebut or mitigate these security concerns.  I conclude that the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) are inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 Additionally, DOHA’s Appeal Board has held that in Guideline B cases “[a] whole-
person analysis should include reasonable consideration of the situation and nature of 
the country involved.” ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006).  The 
Appeal Board has also observed that “[i]n Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the 
foreign government involved in the case, the intelligence gathering history of that 
government, and the presence of terrorist activity is important evidence that provides 
 
9 
 
 
context for the other evidence of record and must be brought to be brought to bear on 
the judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case.”  ISCR Case No. 04-08560 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 10, 2006.)       
 
Accordingly, I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of the whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. Applicant is an adult of 37 years of age. He is highly educated in 
engineering and telecommunications.  He holds two full-time professional positions and 
provides significant support for his parents and sisters living in the West Bank. He 
claims his mother and two of his sisters as dependents for federal income tax purposes. 
 
Applicant’s family members are U.S. citizens living in the West Bank, an area 
with an active history of kidnapping and terrorism that targets U.S. citizens and 
threatens U.S. security interests. Their presence in the West Bank could cause 
Applicant to be subject to coercion, pressure or exploitation by individuals in the West 
Bank who threaten United States security interests.   
 
 Applicant is in weekly telephone contact with his parents. He communicates with 
his four sisters in the West Bank by e-mail.  As a U.S. citizen, Applicant traveled to the 
West Bank in 1999, 2000, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2007 to visit his family. His frequent travel 
to the West Bank increases his exposure to the possibility of hostile actions by those 
who target U.S. citizens and U.S. security interests.  
 
Applicant is a dutiful son and brother and devoted to his family in the West Bank. 
He provides his family with approximately $5,000 to $6,000 of support each year. He 
has plans to visit his parents and sisters in the West Bank in the future, even though the 
U.S. State Department urges U.S. citizens to defer travel to the West Bank because of 
security threats to American citizens and U.S. interests. Applicant’s loyalty and 
commitment to the support of his parents and sisters is admirable. However, it raises 
concerns that his family commitments could cause conflicts in his ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Adjudicative 
Guideline B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
