1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
.......................... )       ISCR Case No. 07-14396
SSN: ............. )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns raised under Guideline J,
Criminal Conduct. Clearance is granted.
On December 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 27, 2008, admitted the allegation,
and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 5, 2009. On March
16, 2009, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the case for April 8, 2009. The
hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received three government exhibits and 17
Applicant referred to them as “runners” (Tr. 77).1
2
Applicant exhibits. Also, I received the testimony of Applicant and five Applicant
witnesses. The transcript was received on April 15, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old single man with one daughter, age 19. He lives with his
girlfriend, the mother of their daughter. He has a high school diploma. Currently, he
performs electrical work for a defense contractor (Tr. 63).
Applicant is from a middle-class, two-parent home. He was a good student in
high school. After graduating, he completed a three-year culinary school. By
approximately 1992, he was working at an elite restaurant (Tr. 40, 59, 69).
Shortly thereafter, Applicant “got with the wrong crowd,” a group of friends from
high school who were dealing drugs (Id.). He was 22 years old at the time. Upon
noticing their flashy lifestyles, he concluded that drug dealing could provide an
opportunity to make significant part-time income (Tr. 74). 
Applicant, with his friends’ assistance, then began dealing marijuana. Later, he
began dealing cocaine (Tr. 75). By approximately 1994, he was making up to $1000 per
week as part of a cocaine-dealing network, and supervised two people (Tr. 77).1
In November 1995, federal authorities arrested Applicant, and charged him with
conspiracy to distribute cocaine base, possession with intent to distribute cocaine base,
and distribution of cocaine base. He did not make bond, and remained incarcerated until
his trial in February 1996 (Tr. 82; Exhibit 3 at 1). At trial, he pleaded guilty to Count 1,
and was sentenced to 14 years in prison (Answer). After cooperating with the
government by disclosing the identities of other people involved in the drug dealing
network, Applicant’s sentence was reduced to eight years (Tr. 84).
Applicant was released after serving six years of the sentence. He spent the first
three years of the sentence residing with the general prison population (Tr. 91).
Because he was a model prisoner, he spent the second half of his sentence residing in
a prison camp (Tr. 92). While there, he spent each day performing custodial work
outside of the prison in civilian buildings with minimal supervision (Tr. 92). 
After Applicant’s release from prison in April 2002, the court placed him on five
years of probation (Tr. 85). He was required to report to a probation officer monthly,
submit to random urinalyses, get a job, and provide copies of pay stubs to the probation
officer at each meeting (Tr. 87). 
Applicant complied with his probation requirements as ordered, and it ended in
2007 (Tr. 85) Toward the end of probation, the probation officer told him that he no
3
longer needed to meet with him, and instructed him simply to report to the office
monthly, and slide the pay stubs under his door (Id.).
Applicant was deeply remorseful about his decision to sell drugs. Shortly after his
incarceration, he told his father that he had “let [him] down” (Tr. 39 - Father’s
Testimony). He devoted his prison time to rehabilitation by reading extensively and
taking business, real estate, and physical fitness courses. Also, he became a nationally
certified personal fitness trainer (Tr. 88). 
Applicant remained in close contact with his family throughout his incarceration.
Specifically, his brother, a teen during Applicant’s arrest, testified that Applicant
repeatedly advised him to make education his top priority, not to “follow the wrong path,”
and to learn how to invest wisely (Tr. 25). Applicant’s brother subsequently finished
college with a degree in mechanical engineering. He and his wife have designated
Applicant to be the legal guardian of their child in the event of their deaths (Exhibit O).
Applicant and his girlfriend remained together during his incarceration. She and
their daughter relocated to Applicant’s parent’s home after his incarceration. According
to his girlfriend, he focused on their daughter during his incarceration to ensure that she
“was going in the right direction” (Tr. 42). He remained closely involved with everyday
activities, helping his daughter with homework by phone, and mailing her practice math
questions, that she would complete, and return to him (Tr. 44, 101). Upon his release,
Applicant continued to be highly involved in his daughter’s life, helping her with various
extracurricular activities. Currently, his daughter is attending college, with a combination
of financial assistance from her parents, grants, and student loans.
Shortly after Applicant was released from prison, his mother was stricken with
breast cancer. For two years while she was incapacitated by chemotherapy treatments,
he assisted in caring for her, cleaning the home, helping her up the stairs, and cooking
for her, each day after work (Tr. 35). Her cancer has been in remission for
approximately five years. 
Applicant is active in breast cancer charities, participating in annual fundraisers
and walkathons (Tr. 106). He periodically volunteers at a local church, delivering food to
its food bank (Tr. 99).
Applicant has worked continuously since his incarceration. He has worked with
his current employer for the past 18 months. During this time, he has earned multiple
job-related certifications after successfully completing training in several areas including
protecting classified information (Exhibits B, C), and information technology (Exhibit K).
According to his supervisor, he is a good team player who is exceptionally self-
motivated (Exhibits M-N).
Applicant spends his free time with his family. He no longer associates with the
people with whom he dealt drugs in the early 1990s. 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Also, “by its very nature, it calls into question
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (Id.).
Applicant’s three-years of drug dealing in the early 1990s, his subsequent arrest,
and conviction trigger the application of AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious or multiple lesser
offenses.” Applicant served six years in prison where he was a model prisoner. He
successfully fulfilled his probation requirements. He has not violated the law since going
to prison 13 years ago. Since being released, he has continuously held employment,
and is well-respected on the job. While in prison, he took several courses, and earned a
fitness training certification. He has earned several certifications since working at his
current job. He is active in his community participating in annual breast cancer
awareness fundraisers, and occasionally volunteering at a local church’s food bank.
5
AG ¶¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened,
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and,
32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to the
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement,” apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Applicant was not a low level drug dealer; he was part of a crime network with
two people working underneath him. The severity of the prison sentence further reflects
the seriousness of the crime.
Neither Applicant’s age nor social background mitigate the crime. He is from a
solid, middle-class, two-parent home. When he began dealing drugs, he had already
finished high school, completed a vocational school, and was maintaining a steady job.
He made a calculated decision to augment his income through illegal means regardless
of the moral and societal consequences.
Nevertheless, the presence of rehabilitation is extraordinary. Upon entering
prison, he dedicated himself to self-improvement, taking whatever courses interested
him and were available. Realizing the profound mistaken judgment he demonstrated in
choosing to deal drugs, he mentored his younger brother not to make the same
mistake. He maintained a close relationship with his daughter, who was approximately
five years old when he first entered prison, and twelve when he was released. Her
testimony regarding his influence on her life was particularly persuasive.
Currently, Applicant spends his time working, where he excels, socializing with
his family, and volunteering, on occasion, in the community. He has not associated with
any of the individuals involved in the criminal enterprise since he was arrested nearly 15
years ago.
The seriousness of the crime is outweighed by its remoteness, and the presence
of rehabilitation, rendering the likelihood of recurrence minimal. Upon considering the
6
disqualifying and mitigating conditions together with the whole person concept, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the criminal conduct security concern. Clearance is
granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
