 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 07-16947 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Thomas McCarthy, Jr., Esq.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guidelines for drug involvement and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on April 12, 2007. After reviewing 
the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office 
 
1
 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On November 4, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) of the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant signed his notarized Answer on December 5, 2008, in which he 
admitted to allegations ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c. under Guideline H. Under Guideline E, he 
admitted to SOR ¶ 2.a, which cross-references allegations 1.a. through 1.c. He denied 
allegations 2.b. and 2.c., which allege deliberate falsification of information he provided 
on his security clearance application. Applicant also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 29, 2008, and the 
case was assigned to me on the following day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
January 9, 2009. However, on January 30, 2009, Applicant's counsel requested a 
continuance, and Department Counsel did not object. I granted the request by Order 
dated February 2, 2009. An Amended Notice of Hearing was issued on February 3, 
2009, re-setting the hearing for February 25, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
During the hearing, the government offered eight exhibits, marked as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf and did not offer exhibits. DOHA received the transcript on March 3, 
2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of Reasons, 
and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 34 years old, earned a bachelor’s degree in 1998 in physics. He has 
been working toward a master’s degree in aerospace engineering since 2003 (Tr 25). He 
is single and does not have children. Applicant worked as a webmaster in the late 1990s, 
and has been employed as a research engineer since 2000 (GE 1). He received his first 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the 
Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was 
issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
2
 
interim security clearance in 1998, and a final secret clearance in approximately March 
2001. In 2007, he submitted an application for a higher level clearance (Tr 24; 98). 
 
Applicant was diagnosed with Attention Deficit Disorder at the age of 12 and 
remains on medication for that illness. Since 2001, he also has been treated for anxiety 
and depression, and currently takes medication for those conditions. He also takes 
medication for high blood pressure and high cholesterol (GE 3; Tr 37; 93-94). 
 
Although many of his friends used illegal drugs during college, Applicant did not. 
However, after college, he used marijuana five times between 1999 and 2005. He first 
used it in 1999, with his former college roommates. He was willing to try it because he 
trusted them to help him if anything went wrong while he used the drug. He also used it 
with his cousin in August 2004; in summer 2005 with his partner and his partner’s friend; 
a fourth time with his partner and a friend in October 2005; and a fifth time at a party he 
and his partner gave on New Year’s Eve, 2005 (GE 3; Tr 35-36). Applicant used the drug 
in response to pressure from his partner and his friends, and because of his desire to 
feel like part of the group (Tr 85). In response to his statement that marijuana did not 
have much of an effect on him (Tr 84), he was asked, 
 
Mr. Jaksetic: Then why did you use it on a variety of occasions 
over several years? 
 
Applicant: It was totally peer pressure. In that, not one instance did 
I ever use it alone. I was surrounded by people I trusted. They 
were doing it, so I, you know, had to feel part of the group and 
that’s you know, what I, what I did. 
 
 At the time he used marijuana, between 1999 and 2005, Applicant was 24 to 30 
years old, and held a security clearance (Tr 74).3 He was aware that marijuana use was 
illegal (Tr 31; 83). He no longer associates with his cousin or the friends with whom he 
used marijuana. He is no longer in a relationship with the partner with whom he used 
marijuana and steroids (Tr 38). 
 
In approximately 2001 or 2002, Applicant used psychedelic mushrooms. He was 
with close friends whom he trusted. He testified that he accepted tea that they had 
prepared, and after he drank it, they informed him that it was made from psychedelic 
mushrooms (Tr 40; 83-84). However, during his Subject Interview, he stated that he 
drank the tea because of peer pressure (GE 3). Applicant reviewed the Interrogatories 
that contain the report of his Subject Interview (GE 3). He made numerous hand-written 
corrections to the report to be sure that “…whoever reads them understand (sic) exactly 
                                                 
3 Applicant testified that during three of the five times he used marijuana he held an active security 
clearance (Tr 99). However, according to the dates he provided in GE 3, he used marijuana a total of four 
times between 2004 and 2005, all of which occurred after he received a final secret clearance in 2001 (Tr 
24). 
 
3
 
what, you know, what was going on with me, and so, you know, so there was no, you 
know, questions about anything.” (Tr 44). He made no corrections to the section where 
he stated that he drank the tea as a result of peer pressure. As he corrected other 
sections that he believed to be wrong, but left that statement uncorrected, I find that 
Applicant was aware that he was accepting a drink made from an illegal drug, and drank 
it anyway because of pressure from his friends to do so. He has not used mushrooms 
since that time (Tr 40-41; 72-73). He no longer associates with the friends with whom he 
used psychedelic mushrooms (Tr 71-72). 
 
In about the summer of 2005, Applicant and his partner decided that they would 
try anabolic steroids. Applicant agreed to use steroids because he wished to improve his 
looks by increasing his muscle size. He also felt pressure from friends, and especially 
from his partner, to use the drug (Tr 94-96). By pooling their money, he and his partner 
were able to afford the drug, and bought it on the internet. Each course of steroids 
required a once-per-week injection for about three months (Tr 29-30). He and his partner 
injected each other, on a weekend or on a Monday morning before work. Applicant took 
three separate courses of steroids: March to June 2005; December 2005 to February 
2006; and October to December 2006. Each course involved 12 shots, for a total of 36 
injections (GE 3; Tr 74). The drug increased his muscle size, but also had negative side 
effects. Applicant discontinued use because he did not look well, the drug could 
negatively affect his blood pressure and cholesterol, and it interfered with his prescription 
medications (GE 2; Tr 93-94). Applicant testified that he was aware that using illegal 
drugs was inconsistent with holding a security clearance (Tr 75), but also stated that 
when he used steroids, he did not think about the fact that he was holding a security 
clearance (Tr 97). When he used anabolic steroids, Applicant was aware it was illegal to 
use them without a prescription (Tr 83; 93-94). He is no longer with the partner with 
whom he used anabolic steroids (Tr 38). 
 
When Applicant completed his Security Clearance Application on April 12, 2007, 
he answered question 24.a. concerning drug use, by stating that he used anabolic 
steroids three times between March 2005 and December 2006. In response to question 
22, he did not disclose a job termination (GE 1). The government alleges that he 
deliberately falsified his answers to both questions.  
 
When describing his anabolic steroid use, Applicant stated that he used the drug 
three times because he considered each course of steroids as one use. He described his 
answer as similar to the way a course of antibiotics would be described (Tr 46), where a 
person would mention having taken a certain antibiotic once, even though he or she 
ingested medication several times a day for 10 days. At his subject interview in May 
2007, Applicant explained he used anabolic steroids once a week for twelve weeks, 
during three separate courses, or 36 total injections (GE 3).  
 
Applicant answered No to question 22 on his security clearance application. The 
question asked whether or not he had left employment for any of the following reasons: 
terminated for cause; quit to avoid termination for cause; left by agreement following 
 
4
 
allegations of misconduct or unsatisfactory performance; or left under any other type of 
unfavorable circumstance (GE 1). Applicant was employed by a company as an 
associate project manager from January to November 2000. Approximately 11 months 
after he started, his employer informed him that he “was not working out” and that he 
would be leaving the company (Tr 54). He was not accused of misconduct (Tr 57). He 
testified there was no “mutual agreement” to leave the job, because he did not want to 
leave it (Tr 57). However, Applicant also testified, and explained in his Interrogatory 
response (GE 4), that he was unhappy because his assignments were not what he had 
been promised (Tr 53), that he felt underutilized and marginalized, that he did not agree 
with his supervisor’s approach to tasks (Tr 59-60), and that he “welcomed” leaving the 
company (Tr 60). Applicant testified that the company was unhappy with his performance 
(Tr 82): 
 
Mr. Jaksetic: Would it be fair to say, basically from your testimony as I 
understand it and your answer to the interrogatories, they weren’t happy 
with your performance and you weren’t happy with the situation, correct? 
 
Applicant: Yes. 
 
 Applicant believes that he was not fired, but laid off, because he received 
unemployment compensation after he left. He testified that he was required to answer 
either “Yes” or “No” on his security clearance application, and because none of the 
choices described his situation; he answered “No” without further explanation. When he 
completed the Interrogatory response in July 2008, he was not required to answer “Yes” 
or “No,” so he selected the option that came closest to describing his situation -- “Left a 
job by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory performance” -- and then 
wrote an explanation of the circumstances (all facts from GE 3 and Tr 53-60). 
 
Applicant's Answer to the SOR contained several attachments. A 2002 
performance evaluation rated him as a “Successful Contributor” and included a letter 
from his program manager describing Applicant as an energetic team member who has 
been assigned increasingly difficult tasks. A letter from one co-worker described him as 
intelligent, and a skillful project manager, with excellent communication skills. Two other 
co-workers described him as an honest, trustworthy, and professional employee who 
abides by program and company policies.  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
                                                 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5
 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an Applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary 
decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the 
government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the 
government meets its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate 
the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an 
Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
Applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who 
will protect the national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the 
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
                                                 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6
 
The facts raise two disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) and AG 
¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance). Applicant admits 
to using three illegal substances: marijuana, psychedelic mushrooms, and anabolic 
steroids. Applicant was granted his security clearance in 1998 and admits that he used 
illegal drugs while he held a clearance. Both conditions apply. 
 
Guideline H also includes two relevant mitigating conditions. The first, AG ¶ 26(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), cannot be applied. Applicant’s last 
use of anabolic steroids was in December 2006, a little more than two years ago, which 
is not distant in time. He used the illegal drug weekly for three-months at a time, 
repeating the process three times over an extended period of more than one-and-one-
half years. His use of illegal drugs did not occur under unique circumstances, but with 
friends, partners, and at social gatherings. In addition, he used illegal drugs because he 
felt pressured by friends and/or his partner. His repeated acquiescence to such 
pressure indicates a willingness to follow others, even when it leads to actions that are 
against the law. His conduct raises doubts about his good judgment and reliability and 
his ability to follow rules and regulations. His illegal drug use, while holding a security 
clearance, is not mitigated.  
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(b) is also relevant: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
Partial mitigation is available under AG ¶ 26(b)(1) and (b)(3). It appears from the record 
that Applicant has not used illegal drugs since December 2006, and that he does not 
associate with the people with whom he used drugs in the past. In particular, he is no 
longer in a relationship with the partner with whom he used both marijuana and anabolic 
steroids. Although these factors weigh in Applicant's favor, they must be viewed in light 
of the period of time during which he willingly engaged in illegal drug use: intermittent 
use of marijuana over a six-year period, and repeated courses of illegal drugs over a 
period of almost two years. In 2005 alone, he used marijuana three times and received 
approximately 12 illegal injections of steroids. Each time he used marijuana or received 
an injection, Applicant made a decision to engage in an illegal activity. Each decision 
was made while he was a mature adult. And each decision was made while he held a 
 
7
 
 
8
security clearance. His willingness to engage repeatedly in illegal activity raises doubts 
about his ability to avoid illegal drugs in the future. Overall, AG ¶ 26(b)(1) and (b)(3) are 
insufficient to mitigate Applicant’s disqualifying conduct. I find against Applicant on 
Guideline H. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure 
to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant's illegal drug use is cross-alleged under Guideline E of the SOR. His 
repeated use of illegal drugs raises serious questions about his judgment, 
trustworthiness and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. However, these 
same qualities are at issue under Guideline H. As these issues are more appropriately 
considered under that Guideline, i will not separately address Applicant's illegal drug 
use under Guideline E. 
 
The government also alleges under Guideline E that Applicant deliberately 
falsified answers he provided to two questions on his security clearance application. 
The first falsification alleged is his disclosure of three uses of anabolic steroids; the 
government contends that Applicant deliberately misrepresented the extent of his 
anabolic steroid use, because he should have listed 36 uses. The government also 
alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the circumstances under which he 
left a previous employer. The allegations implicate AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
Application of AG ¶ 16(a) requires deliberate falsification. Applicant’s failure to list 
each individual injection of anabolic steroids was not intentional. His disclosure of 
serious negative information – his marijuana, psychedelic mushroom, and anabolic 
steroid use – shows that he did not intend to hide relevant information from the 
government. His disclosure put the government on notice that drug use was an issue 
that required further investigation, and it was explored in a Subject Interview one month 
after he submitted his application. Although the difference between three uses and 36 
uses is substantial, his disclosure of three uses was reasonable in light of his 
 
 
9
interpretation of his three courses of drug use. I conclude that Applicant did not 
deliberately falsify his response about the extent of his drug use. 
 
However, the situation is not the same as to Applicant's failure to inform the 
government about the circumstances under which he left his employment in 2000. He 
testified that none of the choices provided in the security clearance application 
described the circumstances under which he left his job. Yet when he later responded 
to the government’s Interrogatories (GE 4), Applicant was provided with the same 
question and the same choices that were available to him on the security clearance 
application. When he completed the Interrogatory response, he selected one choice, 
and wrote an explanation. He could have responded in this manner when he 
completed his application, because it allows for an explanation, both under the specific 
question, and at the end of the application under “Additional Comments.” I conclude 
that Applicant deliberately failed to inform the government about his termination, and 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16 (a) applies. 
 
 Guideline E contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. The 
following conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts); 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); 
 
AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur). 
 
Applicant's falsification about his job termination is unmitigated. Falsification of 
information provided to the government is not minor, and the record contains no 
evidence that he sought to correct the falsification. Such conduct reflects negatively on 
his trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply.   
 
Whole Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
10
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant decided to engage in serious, criminal conduct by using illegal drugs 
numerous times over the years between 1999 and 2006. His last use was a little more 
than two years ago, when he was a mature adult of 31 years. Applicant's recent 
abstinence is insufficient to overcome his history of drug use. Most troubling is the 
refrain that repeats in all his explanations for using drugs: he succumbed to peer 
pressure. Applicant repeatedly followed what others suggested, even though he was 
an adult, and even though they encouraged him to violate the law. His conduct 
demonstrates a willingness to place his own desire to fit in above the government’s 
need for trustworthiness in those to whom it grants access to classified information. 
That Applicant used illegal drugs while he held a security clearance, and did not even 
consider, at the time, the fact that he held a clearance, underscores that he does not 
understand the nature of this obligation. Those who hold security clearances enter into 
a fiduciary relationship based on trust. The government cannot place its confidence in 
those who unthinkingly violate that trust. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.c.   Against Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
11
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
