 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12663 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On October 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 4, 2009, and reassigned to me on March 11, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 17, 2009, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 8, 
2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were received without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were received without objection. The record was held open until April 17, 2009, if 
Applicant wanted to submit additional information. He did not submit any additional 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 15, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old part-time employee of a defense contractor. He is 
applying for his first security clearance in order to work at his part-time job. His full-time 
employment does not require a security clearance. He is a high school graduate with a 
certification attained for his full-time job. He is married with three children, ages 13, 9, 
and 7.1  
 
 Applicant has struggled financially for a number of years. He worked from 1993 
to 2005, as an employee of a small city that is located close to a much larger 
metropolitan area. He left the job in March 2005. He was unemployed for about three 
months. He testified that the job and work environment had become unbearable. He 
was miserable and it was affecting his relationship with his family. He wrote in response 
to DOHA interrogatories that he quit his job and part-time jobs to spend time with his 
family because they had grown apart and needed to reconnect. Debts became 
delinquent during his unemployment and for some time thereafter. When he started 
working again about three months later, it was at a lower salary than at his previous 
job.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted to all the debts, but he stated that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m had 
been paid.   
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d, 1.f, 1.j, and 1.p allege medical debts totaling about $1,208. 
Applicant admitted to owing all the debts in his response to the SOR. None of the debts 
have been paid, but he stated that SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f have been deleted from his 
credit report because they were his wife’s medical bills. The debts are listed on the most 
recent credit report in evidence. Applicant did not submit any documentation supporting 
his statement that the debts have been deleted from his credit report.3    
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-26, 49-51; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 34-38, 48-49. 
 
3 Tr. at 25, 27, 38, 40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted to owing the delinquent debt of $11,963, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h. This debt resulted from the deficiency owed on a car loan after the car was 
repossessed in 2005. He has not made any payments on this debt since the car was 
repossessed.4  
 
 Applicant lost his home to foreclosure in 2005. He owed about $101,500 on the 
mortgage when the property was foreclosed. This is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant 
stated that he thought he had a fixed rate mortgage and did not understand, and the 
mortgage company would not tell him, why the monthly payments kept going up. He 
indicated that he could not afford to pay the mortgage when it went from $800 to almost 
$1,500 per month. It is unclear what, if any, deficiency is still owed on the mortgage. 
Applicant stated that since the foreclosure, he has not heard from the mortgage 
company seeking any additional money.5   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a delinquent debt of $211. Applicant settled this debt in full for 
$105 on December 4, 2008. He testified that he paid the delinquent debt of $95 to a 
jeweler, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, in January 2009. The credit reports in evidence reflect 
that he was making payments on this account and that $95 was what remained on an 
installment contract. I accept Applicant’s testimony and find that this debt has been 
paid.6    
 
 Applicant does not dispute that he owes any of the remaining five debts, which 
total $5,906. He has not made payments on any of the five debts, but stated that he 
intends to pay all his delinquent debts. He hopes to be able to pay the debts with the 
income earned from his second job. He has not received financial counseling, but he 
indicated that his wife plans on enrolling in a financial course.7    
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluation for his full-time job reflects that he is a 
valuable employee whose performance is commendable.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7. 
 
5 Tr. at 28-30, 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-7. 
 
6 Tr. at 39, 41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-7; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 39, 43-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes most of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial issues 
are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. His financial problems are related to his 
unemployment for three months in 2005. However, he voluntarily left that position. His 
unemployment was not a condition that was outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable. The minimal payments he made on his debts are insufficient to qualify as a 
 
6 
 
good-faith effort to repay all his overdue creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. He has 
not received financial counseling; and I do not find clear indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant stated that three of the medical debts were incurred by his wife and 
they were deleted from his credit report. He did not submit documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. His testimony is some evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 
1.f. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
performance evaluation for his full-time job shows that he is a valuable employee. He is 
looking for a security clearance for his part-time job, so that he can pay his debts and 
better provide for his family. His financial problems can be traced to his unemployment 
in 2005. However, he made a conscious decision to leave that job. The job may have 
become very unpleasant, and it may have helped him become closer to his family to 
have the time off work, but he still has been unable to climb out of the financial hole that 
he put himself in. His ongoing financial issues constitute a security concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.k:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
