1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-14696
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
April 14, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on May 25, 2007.  On October 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on November 5, 2008, in which
he elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on January 8, 2009.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
2
FORM on January 12, 2009, and he submitted no reply.  The case was assigned to the
undersigned for resolution on March 24, 2009.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 45 years old and married with two adult children.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as a Technician D, and is applying for a security
clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph1 (Guideline I - Psychological Conditions).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because his emotional, mental
and personality conditions can impair his judgment, reliability or trustworthiness and his
ability to properly protect classified information.  
The Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  Applicant served in the United States Navy from May 1983 until September
1989.  From December 1986 until February 1987, Applicant attended training in Air
Traffic Control Radar Maintenance, and received a certification of completion.  Since
February 1993, he has been employed by a defense contractor.  Applicant was granted
a Secret security clearance by the Department of Defense in December 1999, however
this clearance was suspended in January 2007 due to the mental heath condition
described below.  
On January 14, 2007, the Applicant’s wife called the police because her husband
who was threatening to harm himself and who exhibited an altered state of mind.  The
Applicant was at home consuming a couple of alcoholic drinks, when he went to the
bathroom and learned that his wife had taken the prescription drug Ambien with her to
their daughter’s house in Syracuse, where she was visiting at the time.  Hospital
medical records indicate that the Applicant became upset with his wife for taking the
Ambien, that he telephoned her and told her that he just “bled to death”.  His wife had
taken the Ambien with her due to her fear that the Applicant would overdose on the
drug.  
The Applicant was taken to the a Hospital Emergency Room in the custody of the
local police department.  Applicant was admitted for a physical and psychiatric
evaluation, and initially refused a CT scan ordered by a physician in the Emergency
Room.  (Government Exhibit 5). 
The Psychiatric Discharge Summary from the hospital states that according to
the Applicant’s wife, since June 2006, the Applicant had been increasingly paranoid with
the belief that people were following him in his town and that he was being investigated
3
by the Government.  He referred to people in the community as puppets and started e-
mailing his time sheets to himself out of paranoid belief that people at his job were trying
to get rid of him.  In addition, he believed people at his place of work and his neighbors
were making an inordinate amount of noise.  He was also afraid that people were trying
to steal his identity.  His wife stated that he had gone so far as to hit people in the
market with his shopping cart out of the belief that they pose him some harm.  Other
paranoid beliefs of the Applicant are described in the medical records.  (Government
Exhibit 5).  
The psychiatrist who conducted the mental health examination of the Applicant at
the hospital concluded that the Applicant had experienced multiple delusions in his
history and that he exhibited poor insight and judgment.  Applicant was prescribed the
psychiatric medication, Risperdal, to target Applicant’s psychoses.  The doctor
diagnosed the Applicant with Delusional Disorder and Psychosis Not Otherwise
Specified.  Applicant was discharged from the hospital on January 16, 2007, with the
recommendation that he take his prescribed medication on a daily basis and that he
follow up with mental health counseling.  (Government Exhibit 5).  Shortly after being
discharged, the Applicant dispensed with using his Risperdal.  (Government Exhibit 4).  
On September 23, 2008, Applicant received a psychological evaluation from a
Clinical and Neuropsychologist.  The Applicant was given the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory (MMPI) examination which demonstrated that the Applicant
exhibited, “strong paranoia” with a score of 95.  The psychologist noted that any score
above 65 is considered in the “pathological range.”  The Applicant was diagnosed with
suffering from DSM-IV-TR Axis II 301, ”Paranoid Personality Disorder.”  This is a
pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are interpreted
as malevolent, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts.  He
further states that, “It is unfortunately of a continuing nature.  It has been going on for a
number of years.  It seems to get worse and the client is clearly entrenched in his
beliefs that he is a target in a conspiracy by his family, his friends, and his fellow
employees.  He also believes that the government is watching him and tracking his
movements and they are out to destroy him”.  (Government Exhibit 4).      
As to whether the Applicant’s illness affects his work: The doctor noted that the
Applicant’s psychological condition is affecting him both at home and at work.
“Applicant continued to suffer anxiety attacks, and he believed that his sister, wife and
son are now all involved in the plots against him.  It was also noted that the Applicant
quickly dispensed of the psychiatric medication that was prescribed to him for daily
use”.  (Government Exhibit 4).
As to whether the Applicant is in remission: The evaluation noted that the illness
and paranoia are by no means in remission and are active and full-blown at the present
time.  “He is not taking any medication that is deconfusional and would be considered
an anti-psychotic.  He is not utilizing the mental health center as suggested when he
was released from the hospital”.  (Government Exhibit 4).
4
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent guidelines.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Guideline I - (Psychological Conditions)
27. The Concern.  Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.  A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not
required for there to be a concern under this guideline.  A duly qualified mental health
professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) employed by, or acceptable to
and approved by the U.S. Government, should be consulted when evaluating potentially
disqualifying and mitigating information under this guideline.  No negative inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raise solely on the basis of seeking
mental health counseling.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
28(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but not limited to
emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior.
28(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the individual
has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may impair judgment,
reliability, or trustworthiness;
28(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a diagnosed
emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g. failure to take prescribed medication.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
5
a. The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . .  shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline I (Psychological
Conditions) that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between
Applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified
information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
6
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.  The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSION
Having considered the evidence in light of the appropriate legal standards and
factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the record, this
Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its case as to all
allegations in the SOR, and that Applicant's questionable psychological conditions has a
direct and negative impact on his suitability for access to classified information.  
In 2007, the Applicant was diagnosed with Delusional Disorder and a Psychosis
Not Otherwise Specified, and most recently in 2008, less than a year ago, with Paranoid
Personality Disorder.  Two competent mental health professionals have evaluated the
Applicant’s mental condition and have diagnosed a mental disorder.  The question to be
addressed now is whether the Applicant has emotional, mental or personality disorders
which can cause a significant defect in the individual’s psychological, social, and
occupational functioning that may adversely affect the individual’s ability to properly
safeguard classified information.  Clearly the Applicant’s mental condition poses a
security risk.  A psychiatrist and psychologist indicate that the nature of the Applicant’s
illness is one that exhibits distorted judgment and an altered mental state.  Applicant’s
illness and paranoia are not in remission, but are full blown.  Furthermore, he is not
taking any medication to help his mental state nor is he utilizing the recommended
mental heath counseling.  The nature of the illness is continuing and there is no positive
outlook at this time.  Considering this evidence in totality, the Applicant’s mental
condition demonstrates an emotional, mental, and personality condition that can impair
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness and can adversely affect his ability to protect
classified information.  
Under Guideline I, Psychological Conditions, Disqualifying Conditions 28(a)
behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness that
is not covered under any other guideline, including but not limited to emotionally
unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior, 28(b) an
opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the individual has a condition
not covered under any other guideline that may impair judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness and, 28(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to
a diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g. failure to take prescribed
medication apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.
There has been no evidence presented in mitigation significant to override the
Applicant’s heavy burden in this case.  Applicant has not met his burden of
7
demonstrating that his psychological condition does not raise a security concern, and
Guideline I is found against the Applicant.
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, an
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
  
Considering all of the evidence presented, it does not come close to mitigating
the negative effects of his psychological condition and the impact that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant
has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.    
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
