                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15530 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On November 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 22, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 12, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 18, 2009. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on March 23, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and one witness testified. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant also offered Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel did not object and it was 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 30, 2009.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 26 years old and single. She has an associate’s degree and has 
worked as a program specialist for a defense contractor since April 2006. Previously 
she worked from December 2005 until her present employment doing the same job, but 
with a different contractor.  
 
On February 16, 2006, Applicant completed a security clearance application 
(SCA). In response to section 24 asking about her use of illegal drugs in the past, she 
stated she had used marijuana approximately 20 times between September 2001 and 
November 2004. Applicant knew when she completed the SCA that she used marijuana 
more than 20 times during this time period and intentionally under reported her drug 
use. Her explanation for failing to be completely honest was because she was worried 
that she would not be granted a security clearance if she accurately reported her drug 
use or that she would lose her job. She thought her drug use would negatively impact 
her ability to be granted a security clearance. Applicant admitted at her hearing that she 
was not truthful when answering questions on her SCA regarding her drug use.1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she explained her rationale for under reporting 
her drug use as follows: 
 
I deny this statement. I disclosed the amount of times I used marijuana in 
the in person interview. During this interview I explained that I was afraid 
that by telling the truth in the form that I wouldn’t get a clearance, but 
thought that I should be honest 2 years later when I was interviewed.2 
 
On February 9, 2007, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). During the interview she admitted while at 
college from September 2001 to November 2004 she would smoke marijuana most 
days. It gave her a calming effect and gave her creativity for her art work. During this 
interview she admitted that she purchased marijuana on two to three occasions. She 
also admitted she failed a drug test given by an employer in 2004. She was given 
subsequent drug tests, which she passed. On October 15, 2008, Applicant swore to the 
accuracy of her February 9, 2007, statement.3 
 
1 Tr. 36-37. 
 
2 Answer to SOR. 
 
3 GE 2.  
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
At her hearing Applicant testified she intentionally minimized the amount 
of her marijuana use and drug purchases during her February 9, 2007, OPM 
interview because she was nervous and scared she would not get a security 
clearance.4 
 
 On April 3, 2007, Applicant was again interviewed by an investigator from 
OPM. She stated she was unsure of how many times she used marijuana 
between September 2001 and November 2004, but it may have exceeded 100 
times. In her first interview she listed only 20 times because she couldn’t recall 
the exact amount. She used marijuana between 1-2 times a week until the school 
year ended in spring 2002. She purchased marijuana approximately ten times 
during this time period. She transferred schools in the fall of 2002 and continued 
to use marijuana about once or twice a month. After she graduated she 
purchased marijuana approximately three times on the streets of the city where 
she lived. She continued to smoke marijuana about once a month.5 
 
 Applicant stopped smoking marijuana after she failed a random drug test 
given by her employer in 2004. She decided her career was more important and 
stopped using illegal drugs. She passed the subsequent random drug tests 
conducted by her employer. She admitted while working as a free lance artist for 
her employer she would smoke marijuana at home about 30 minutes before 
beginning her work. At her hearing she testified that she was never “high” at 
work. Applicant swore to the accuracy of her April 3, 2007 statement on October 
15, 2008.6 
 
 At her hearing Applicant stated that after she consulted with her present 
employer about her security clearance interview she was told she should have 
divulged the entire truth. She was also told by her mentor that she should tell the 
whole truth.7  
 
 In interrogatories subscribed and sworn to on March 22, 2008, Applicant 
answered question 3, which asked about her prior illegal drug use, that she used 
marijuana twice a day prior to 2004. Her last use was 2004 and she has no 
intention of using illegal drugs in the future. Her family and her employer are 
aware of her past drug use. She no longer associates with those friends with 
whom she used drugs. She did not have her priorities straight and now she does. 
She is willing to take random drug tests to show she no longer uses illegal 
drugs.8 
4 Tr. 36-42. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. 48-49; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 44-46. 
 
8 Tr. 31-33; GE 3. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant admitted at her hearing that she did not reveal the full extent of 
her marijuana use on her SCA. She admitted she was only estimating her use on 
her SCA. She admitted that during her two interviews her memory improved as to 
how much she used marijuana. She finally admitted during her April 3, 2007, 
interview that she smoked marijuana most days throughout college. She knew 
how often she used marijuana during college and when she completed her SCA 
and when she listed she only used it 20 times.9 She testified as follows: “When I 
filled out the application, I was worried that I would not be able to gain a 
clearance knowing that I had smoked marijuana more than 20 times.” She further 
stated: “However, when I filled out the application, it wasn’t to lie, you know, to lie 
about it. I just wasn’t sure exactly what I should put down. I was very young and 
nervous.”10 I find Applicant intentionally and deliberately provided inaccurate 
information on her SCA and during her interview. 
 
 Applicant was questioned as to why, when she was interviewed on 
February 9, 2007, she did not provide the complete details about her marijuana 
use. She stated: “I was also very nervous at that point. I wasn’t sure what I –I 
mean, I understand now that I should have been very truthful with them. I 
honestly don’t have an explanation.” She admitted she did not make an effort to 
correct her inaccuracies until she was contacted for a second interview. 11 
 
 Applicant admitted that when she began the SCA process her prior 
employer required her to have a security clearance. She admitted she was 
untruthful on her SCA when she was employed by this contractor. When she 
began work for her current employer, she learned she did not need a clearance 
to actually do her job. She testified she then provided truthful information 
because her mentor and supervisor explained she needed to be truthful 
regardless of the outcome of the security clearance process. It was at this point 
she told the truth about her drug past.12  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on her behalf. Applicant has worked for her 
for approximately three years. Applicant has advanced to work on more 
challenging assignments. She believes Applicant to be honest, trustworthy, and 
caring. Her job performance is rated as excellent. She has never known 
Applicant to be dishonest.13  
 
9 Tr. 22-25. 
 
10 Tr. 25-28. 
 
11 Tr. 28-29. 
 
12 Tr. 51-56. Department Counsel verified that Applicant was being sponsored by her employer 
for a security clearance. 
 
13 Tr. 61-71. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s deputy program manager testified on her behalf. She has 
worked for him for three years. He believes she is an honest and trustworthy 
person and rates her performance as “strong.” She is independent and self-
motivated.14  
 
 A coworker/supervisor also provided a character letter for Applicant. She 
considers Applicant is an outstanding employee. She stated “[h]er work ethic is 
beyond reproach and she has earned the complete trust and confidence of her 
peers and subordinates alike.” She is a trusted member of the team and can be 
relied upon to be forthright and honest in all matters.15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.” 
  
14 Tr. 71-85. 
 
15 AE A. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
I have considered all of the facts and find Applicant deliberately omitted, 
concealed, misled, and falsified information on her 2006 SCA and during her 2007 
interview with an OPM investigator. I find disqualifying conditions (a) and (b) apply.  
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered the following under AG ¶ 17: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
Applicant did not make an effort to correct the omissions and falsifications on her 
SCA before being confronted. Applicant continued to minimize her drug history during 
her first interview. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. Her actions can not be 
considered minor because she failed to divulge important information that was pertinent 
to her security clearance investigation and determination thereby casting doubt about 
her reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Telling the truth on a SCA, regardless 
of the ramifications, is at the heart of determining whether someone is trustworthy and 
honest. Applicant willingly lied because she believed it would negatively impact her 
ability to obtain a security clearance or keep her job. This is precisely the type of test 
that reflects whether a person can be trusted to tell the truth and safeguard our nation’s 
secrets, especially when the consequences may be detrimental to ones personal well-
being. Applicant did not pass that test. She acknowledged she was young, immature, 
and scared of losing her job or not being granted a security clearance. It is troubling that 
not until she was told by a supervisor and mentor that she should be completely truthful, 
did she finally do so. Although she has acknowledge her mistakes and now has a better 
understanding of the process, not enough time has passed to confirm that Applicant has 
permanently changed her behavior and will consistently adhere to the high standards 
required of those holding security clearances, regardless of the consequences. I find 
none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young woman with an 
excellent work record. I have considered the character testimony and statement 
provided along with her youth and immaturity at the time she was going through the 
security clearance process. I considered Applicant knowingly and intentionally falsified 
her SCA and provided untruthful information during her 2007 OPM interview. Applicant 
should not have to decide when she needs to tell the truth, but rather to always tell the 
truth. It is apparent Applicant has learned an important lesson. She deserves credit for 
eventually admitting the full extent of her marijuana use. However, under the 
circumstances of this case, it is too early to confirm that Applicant has a committed 
understanding to ensuring she is always truthful despite the potential negative impact it 
may have on her personally. Honesty and truthfulness is the cornerstone of ensuring 
our nation’s secrets are protected. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts at this time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
