KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant’s in-laws live in Russia. His wife speaks to them several times per month.
Recently, Applicant and his wife invested in property in Russia in order to develop a hotel to be
operated by his in-laws upon the retirement of his father-in-law. Russia has an active, recent, and
ongoing intelligence collection program targeting the U.S.  Russian officials reportedly engage in
human rights abuses, including abductions, torture, coerced confessions, and unlawful
surveillance of citizens and visitors.
The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial record
evidence.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.   There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.  The Judge’s whole person
analysis complies with the requirements of the Directive.  The Judge noted Applicant’s favorable
evidence but balanced that against the presence of in-laws and property in Russia, which has a
problematic human rights record and conducts espionage against the U.S. 
CASENO: 07-17673.a1
DATE: 04/02/2009
DATE: April 2, 2009
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-17673
2
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 13, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 6, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge David M. White
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact were
based upon substantial record evidence; whether the Judge did not consider all the record evidence;
whether the Judge erred in his weighing of the evidence; whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis
failed to satisfy the requirements of the Directive; and whether the Judge erred in failing to conclude
that Applicant had mitigated the security concerns in his case.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a technician employed
by a Defense contractor.  He served in the Army for nine years.  After leaving the Army he worked
in the Middle East, where he met his wife, who was born and raised in Russia.  They married in the
mid-1990s and Applicant’ wife became a U.S. citizen in the mid-2000s.  They have one son, born
in the U.S.  Applicant’s father-in-law works for a Russian state university.  His mother-in-law retired
from teaching science seventeen years ago and has been a homemaker ever since.  Applicant speaks
no Russian and has had limited direct contact with his in-laws, having seen them during visits to
Russia or during their visits to the U.S.  His wife speaks to her parents “by telephone several times
per month.”  Decision at 3.  Recently, Applicant and his wife invested one-half of the $100,000
purchase price of some property in southern Russia.  The purpose was to develop a hotel or bed and
breakfast to be operated by his in-laws upon the retirement of his father-in-law.  Applicant and his
wife earn $60,500 and $51,000 respectively.  They own two pieces of real estate in the U.S. of a total
value of $601,900.  Applicant’s character references describe him as honest, reliable, and hard-
working.  Applicant also submitted favorable character evidence concerning his father-in-law,
provided by those with personal knowledge of him.
3
“Russia has an active, recent, and ongoing intelligence collection program targeting the U.S.”
Id. at 4.  Along with China it is the most aggressive collector of sensitive and protected U.S.
technology.  It is a leader in industrial espionage against the U.S.  “Russian officials reportedly
engage in human rights abuses, including abductions, torture, coerced confessions, and unlawful
surveillance of citizens and visitors.”  Id.  
The Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”) Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider or did
not properly weigh evidence which he submitted in mitigation, such as the strength of his ties to the
U.S., his service to the U.S. in combat zones, and evidence concerning the nature of his relationship
with his in-laws.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he
specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009); ISCR
Case No. 07-00553 at 2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2008).  He is not required to discuss each and every piece
of record evidence in making a decision.  See ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007).
Furthermore, a party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue
for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).   We have considered Applicant’s
appeal brief in light of the Judge’s decision and the record evidence.  We find no basis to conclude
that the Judge did not consider the entire record or that he weighed the evidence in an arbitrary or
capricious manner.
Applicant takes exception to the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant was potentially vulnerable
to pressure or influence because of the circumstances of his in-laws.  Applicant argues that the
Judge’s analysis seems to equate his relationship with his in-laws to his wife’s relationship with her
parents.  He insists that he deserves the right to have his own record and relationship examined, and
he states that the concept that his relationship with his wife’s parents is as close as hers simply
because he is close to his wife is deeply flawed and denies him due process rights.  Applicant asserts
that his relationship with his wife’s parents is inherently different from his wife’s relationship with
her parents.  Applicant’s arguments on this point are not persuasive. 
There is nothing in the Judge’s decision indicating that he equates Applicant’s relationship
with his wife’s parents with his wife’s relationship with them.  Rather, the Judge gave appropriate
recognition to the fact that, through his loving relationship with his wife, Applicant has a legitimate,
serious interest in the welfare of her parents who are citizens and residents of Russia.  The Board has
recognized that, as a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members
of the person’s spouse.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (Feb. 20, 2002).  A review of the
record evidence convinces the Board that the presumption has not been overcome in this case.
Accordingly, the Judge did not err in considering the immediate family members of Applicant’s
spouse as raising unmitigated security concerns.      
4
We conclude that the Judge’s whole person analysis complies with the requirements of
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  The Judge’s decision noted Applicant’s favorable evidence as to character, as
well as evidence concerning the good character of his wife and in-laws.  However, he balanced that
against evidence that Applicant’s foreign in-laws and property holdings are in Russia, which has a
problematic human rights record and which conducts espionage against the U.S.  The Board
concludes that the Judge considered the totality of Applicant’s circumstances in reaching his
decision.  See ISCR Case No. 05-03948 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 21, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-09959
at 6 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006).  In support of his appeal, Applicant has referred the Board to
numerous other industrial security cases, both from the Hearing Office and the Board.  He contends
that these other applicants were granted clearances under factual circumstances similar to his own.
We give due consideration to them.  However, each case “must be decided upon its own merits.”
Directive ¶ E2.2.3.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The Board will  reverse a Judge’s
decision only if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  As stated above, the Judge’s conclusion that, through his wife, Applicant
has close ties to his Russian in-laws is consistent with the record evidence.  The Judge’s further
conclusion that Applicant had failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from this relationship
is also consistent with the record evidence.  See  ISCR Case No. 01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)
(There is a rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interests are
adverse to the United States and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect and safeguard
classified information). On this record, the Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly consistent with the
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance” is sustainable.
Decision at 9.  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security’”). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
5
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
