1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08022
SSN: -------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns raised under
Guidelines F, Financial Considerations, and E, Personal Conduct. Clearance is denied.
On December 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines G and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 2, 2008, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on February 12, 2009. On February 17, 2009 a Notice of
Hearing was issued originally scheduling the case for March 2, 2009. The hearing was
continued because of inclement weather, and rescheduled for April 6, 2009. It was then
2
held as scheduled. At the hearing, I received six government exhibits and Applicant’s
testimony. The transcript was received on April 15, 2009.
Rulings of Procedure and Evidence
I. I granted department counsel’s motion to withdraw SOR subparagraphs 1.k
and 1.m. 
2. SOR subparagraph 1.g, alleging a debt to a creditor identified only as “a
medical account,” is vague and overbroad. Although SORs do not need to be drafted
with the specificity of criminal pleadings, they must, at minimum, be drafted with enough
specificity to enable applicants to prepare a response. SOR subparagraph 1.g does not
meet this threshold, therefore I will not consider it.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 59-year-old married man with three adult children. He is a veteran
of the U.S. Marine Corps where he served from 1969 through 1979. He was honorably
discharged. While in the Marines, he served a tour of duty in Vietnam.
Applicant has a GED. In 1994, he attended vocational school, earning a
mechanical drafting certificate (Exhibit 1 at 9). He has spent approximately the past 20
years working for various defense contractors in the mechanical drafting field (Tr. 18).
He has been working for his current employer since February 2008 (Exhibit 1 at 9).
Appellant owes creditors approximately $50,000 of debt in various stages of
delinquency. He accrued the majority of the delinquencies during the past ten years. 
SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c are credit cards with balances ranging from
$150 to $360 (Exhibit 3 at 1-2). Each is one month behind with amounts due ranging
from $43 to $46 (Id.). The credit cards listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e,
collectively totalling approximately $11,600, have been charged off (Exhibit 3 at 2). SOR
subparagraphs 1.f and 1.h, collectively totalling $23,500, are in collection status (Exhibit
3 at 3). SOR subparagraph 1.i is the deficiency remaining from an automobile
repossessed in 2004 (Id.). SOR subparagraph 1. j, is Applicant’s mortgage payment,
which is overdue in the amount of $1,462 (Answer).
Applicant failed to pay his state income taxes between 1988 and 1993 (Tr. 50).
This led to the imposition of three tax liens between 1991 and 1996. Applicant has
satisfied two of them (Exhibits 4-5). One, in the amount of $10,685, remains
outstanding. 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to health problems stemming from a
work-related injury in 1991 and a number of chronic ailments experienced within the
past ten years (Tr. 18). Also, he contends that several periods of unemployment have
exacerbated his financial difficulties, including a one-year period of underemployment in
3
2004, and a four month unemployment period between November 2007 and February
2008 (Exhibit 1 at 10).
In June 2008, Applicant met with a security clearance investigator. In response to
questions about his finances, he promised to contact the creditors and begin making
payment arrangements (Exhibit 6 at 1). To date, he has not done so.
Applicant earns approximately $52,000 per year. His wife works part-time at a
bank and earns $10 per hour. He does not maintain a budget. Although he has not
sought financial counseling, he and his wife have discussed filing for bankruptcy
protection.
Applicant disclosed neither the 2004 automobile repossession, nor the delinquent
debts as required on his 2008 security clearance application. He contends that the
repossession “slipped his mind” (Tr. 54). As for the other financial questions, he was
aware of his indebtedness when he completed the security clearance application, but
did not list them because he “needed the job” (Tr. 56).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Applicant’s longstanding delinquencies trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
I also considered AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income
tax returns as required, or the fraudulent filing of the same,” in evaluating Applicant’s
income tax difficulties. Although record evidence establishes that he did not pay his
income taxes timely between 1988 and 1993, there is no record evidence that
establishes that he failed to file his income tax returns. AG ¶ 19(c) does not apply.
I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Despite
promising a security clearance investigator that he was going to begin organizing and
satisfying his debts, he failed to do so. Also, he has neither sought financial counseling
nor developed a budget. Although his health and employment problems could
conceivably trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances,” he failed to present any evidence establishing
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15). Applicant’s omission of pertinent financial information from his
security clearance application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” applies.
Applicant had a duty to provide candid, truthful responses on his security
clearance application. His concealment of relevant, material information is not mitigated
by his concern that he may not have gotten the job if he had disclosed his financial
delinquencies, as required on his security clearance application (see generally, DISCR
OSD NO. 89-1586 (App. Bd. October 26, 1990)). His intentional omission of delinquent
debts from the security clearance application undermines the credibility of his contention
5
that he did not list the 2004 automobile repossession because he forgot about it. AG ¶
16(a) applies without mitigation.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Applicant’s financial delinquencies were caused partially by his history of health
problems and job instability. However, he failed to follow through on a promise to begin
satisfying them. Currently, all of the SOR delinquencies remain outstanding. In light of
this broken promise and his SOR falsifications, any future promises to pay the
delinquencies have limited probative value. Upon considering the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions together with the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant has
not mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.
Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.h -1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: WITHDRAWN
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
