 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08477 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, failed to mitigate the foreign influence and 
foreign preference security concerns arising from becoming an Israeli citizen, his 
exercise of this dual citizenship, and his close relationship and contacts with family 
members who are citizens and residents of Israel. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 18, 2008. On October 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
government’s security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence).1 The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                          
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied 
or revoked. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 30, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 8, 2008, scheduling a hearing on 
January 6, 2009. The hearing was conducted as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection (Tr. 18). GE 4 is a government motion for me to take 
administrative notice of facts regarding the government of Israel.2 Applicant testified on 
his own behalf, and presented one exhibit (AE 1), which was admitted without objection 
(Tr. 21). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR allegations with some 
corrections and explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old business continuity planner working for a defense 
contractor since January 2007. He was born, raised, and educated in the United States 
to U.S.-born parents (GE 1, Tr. 52). He served in the U.S. Air Force from 1960 to 1962. 
In 1962, he received an early discharge “for the needs of the service” (Tr. 23). He 
refused to explain the reason behind his early discharge. His service was characterized 
as honorable. 
 
He married his first wife in 1972, and they were divorced two years later. He has 
no children of this marriage (Tr. 27). In 1974, Applicant converted to Judaism (Tr. 71). In 
May 1975, he relocated to Israel to learn Hebrew and to be able to read religious source 
documents (Tr. 28-32, 53). He was 32 years old. From May 1975 to May 1979, 
Applicant lived, worked, and studied in Israel. He worked and studied at a Kibbutz, 
taught English at Israeli government schools, attended Israeli government sponsored 
courses, and worked for an Israeli company that makes electronic products for the 
Israeli military. He received a student stipend of approximately $5,000 from the Israeli 
government. He believes he is not entitled to an Israeli retirement pension because of 
the short period he worked in Israel. As an Israeli citizen, however, he is entitled to 
 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2  GE 4 was marked for identification and considered for administrative notice only. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Israeli government benefits, such as medical care, welfare, and economic benefits (Tr. 
80, 85-86).  
 
During the first three years, Applicant lived in Israel as a temporary resident. At 
the end of his third year, he was offered his Israeli citizenship and he accepted it. He did 
nothing to refuse it (Tr. 33). He believes that if he had asked for his Israeli citizenship he 
would have jeopardized his U.S. citizenship. He did not want to jeopardize his U.S. 
citizenship, and he took no affirmative action to ask for his Israeli citizenship. He also 
explained that while living in lsrael, he did not vote, run for public office, or volunteer for 
the Israeli army. He paid his U.S. taxes while in Israel.  
 
In 1976, Applicant met his wife in Israel and they were married in 1977 (Tr. 35). 
They have three children of this marriage. His first son was born in Israel and is a dual 
citizen of Israel and the United States (Tr. 36). Applicant returned to the United States in 
May 1979, because he was disappointed with Israeli politics, could not buy milk for his 
new born son, and the economic opportunities were better in the United States (AE 1). 
His second son was born in the United States. Applicant believes he renounced his 
Israeli citizenship, but does not know when or why. Applicant’s 21-year-old daughter is a 
dual citizen of the United States and Israel. She moved to Israel in 2007, seeking 
admission at an Israeli university (Tr. 26-27). She works part time in restaurants and 
teaches English. Applicant’s daughter is marrying an Israeli citizen in February 2009 (Tr. 
25). According to Applicant, his future son-in-law is a 32-year-old teacher who is also a 
reservist in the Israeli Defense Forces. Applicant intends to travel to Israel for his 
daughter’s wedding (Tr. 55).  
 
Applicant travelled to Israel in 1986, to celebrate his son’s bar mitzvah with his 
Israeli relatives (Tr. 43). In 2006, he travelled with his wife to visit with her mother and 
other immediate and extended family members who are residents and citizens of Israel 
(Tr. 44). Whenever they travel to Israel, Applicant and his family stay with his wife’s 
relatives. Applicant’s mother-in-law was born in Morocco. She immigrated to Israel in 
1969 (Tr. 46). Applicant’s wife talks to her mother every week. She talks to her two 
sisters, four brothers and other Israeli relatives approximately one or two times a month 
(Tr. 48). One of Applicant’s sisters-in-law works for the Israeli Army as a civilian 
employee. Two of his brothers-in-law work for the Israeli government: one is a clerk in 
the city administration, and the other works for the agriculture department (Tr. 49).  
 
He has less contact than his wife with her mother, siblings, and other relatives 
because of his language limitation (Tr. 48). All of his Israeli relatives are aware 
Applicant is being considered for a national security position (Tr. 57). His wife became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in January 1987 (Tr. 40). Applicant and his wife intend to spend 
six months of the year in Israel, and six months in the United States after he retires (at 
age 70) (Tr. 80). For that reason alone, he intends to retain his Israeli citizenship (AE 1). 
 
Applicant testified that he was never issued an Israeli passport (Tr. 50). He was 
issued an Israeli identification card and a one-year Israeli travel document to leave 
Israel in 1979 (Tr. 79). He still has a valid Israeli identification card (Tr. 50-51). He was 
 
4 
 
 
issued one-year Israeli travel documents to travel in and out of Israel in 1986 and 2006. 
He used them in preference to his American passport. Both documents expired. He 
intends to obtain another Israeli travel document to travel to Israel for his daughter’s 
wedding in 2009.  
 
Applicant expressed displeasure at the security clearance process. He found it 
insulting, and expressed the misconception that his loyalty to the United States was 
being questioned. He noted that at age 17 he volunteered to serve in the Air Force. He 
further stated: “seeing the Stars and Stripes after four years overseas brought tears to 
my eyes. Unlike most citizens, I know the value of this country and I am not about to 
jeopardize its security.” (GE 3). Applicant also stated that he is “still loathe to surrender 
his Israeli citizenship” (GE 3). 
  
 I take administrative notice of the following facts. The government of Israel is a 
parliamentary democracy. The Israeli government generally respects the human rights 
of its citizens, but there are some issues with respect to treatment of Palestinian 
detainees, conditions in some detention and interrogation facilities, and discrimination 
against Israel’s Arab citizens. Since 1948, the United States and Israel have developed 
a close friendship based on common democratic values, religious affinities, and security 
interests. Israel has a diversified, technologically advanced economy and the United 
States is Israel’s largest trading partner. Since 1976, Israel has been the largest 
recipient of U.S. foreign aid. The two countries also have very close security relations.   
 
 U.S. - Israeli bilateral relations are multidimensional and complex. Israel has 
given a high priority to gaining wide acceptance as a sovereign state and to ending 
hostilities with Arab forces. Israel and the United States participate in joint military 
planning and combined exercises, and have collaborated on military research and 
weapons development. Commitment to Israel’s security and well being has been a 
cornerstone of U.S. policy in the Middle East since Israel’s creation in 1948, and the two 
countries are bound closely by historic and cultural ties as well as mutual interests. 
 
 Notwithstanding, there are several issues of concern regarding U.S. relations 
with Israel. These include Israel’s military sales to China, inadequate Israeli protection 
of U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-related cases. There are several cases of 
U.S. citizens convicted of selling, attempting to sell, or providing classified documents to 
Israeli Embassy officials, as well as cases of Israeli nationals indicted for espionage.   
 
 Israel is one of the most active collectors of proprietary information. Israeli 
military officers have been implicated in this type of technology collection in the United 
States. There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, 
of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Israel. 
 
 The theft of sensitive and proprietary information threatens U.S. national security 
in both military and economic terms, and it reveals the intelligence-gathering capabilities 
of foreign governments and foreign companies. Industrial espionage is intelligence-
gathering “conducted by a foreign government or by a foreign company with direct 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
assistance of a foreign government against a private U.S. company for the purpose of 
obtaining commercial secrets.” Industrial espionage is not limited to targeting 
commercial secrets of a merely civilian nature, but rather can include the targeting of 
commercial secrets that have military applications, sensitive technology that can be 
used to harm the United States and its allies, and classified information.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.3  
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”4 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
3  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
4  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
Under AG ¶ 10(a)(1) Applicant may be disqualified for the “exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the 
foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (3) accepting 
educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits.” Under AG ¶ 
10(b) Applicant may be disqualified for “action to acquire or obtain recognition of a 
foreign citizenship by an American citizen.”  
 
Applicant was born in the United States to U.S. born parents. In 1975, he 
travelled to Israel to study Hebrew under an Israeli government sponsored program, 
received an educational stipend from the Israeli government, and worked indirectly for 
the Israeli government. After three years in Israel, he became an Israeli citizen. As of 
the day of his hearing, he possessed an Israeli identification card. As an Israeli citizen, 
he is entitled to Israeli travel documents and to Israeli government benefits. After he 
retires, he and his wife intend to live 50% of the time in Israel and 50% in the United 
States. AG ¶¶ 10(a)(3) and 10(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate the foreign preference 
security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
7 
 
 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Applicant’s security concerns arose, in part, out of his acquiring Israeli citizenship 
and his exercise of his dual citizenships with Israeli. In December 2008, Applicant stated 
he would loathe surrendering his Israeli citizenship. At his hearing, Applicant expressed 
similar feelings, along with his intent to live in Israel, at least 50% of the time. Applicant 
has travelled to Israel two or three times since 1979. In all his travels to Israel, he used 
his Israeli travel document. He intends to travel on an Israeli travel document in 
February 2009. As of his hearing day, Applicant enjoyed all the privileges and rights of 
Israeli citizens, including the possession of a valid Israeli identification card, and the 
ability to use Israeli travel documents.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                     
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.5 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with daughter and his in-laws who are Israeli 
citizens residing in Israel. The closeness of the relationship is shown by Applicant’s 
frequent telephone contacts with them, directly or through his wife, the fact that he is 
travelling back to Israel for his daughter’s wedding, and the love, affection and/or 
obligation he expressed for his daughter and in-laws. 
 
This contact creates a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because 
there is always the possibility that Israeli agents may exploit the opportunity to obtain 
sensitive or classified U.S. information. Israel is one of the most active collectors of 
sensitive and proprietary information from the United States. Israeli military officers have 
been implicated in the collection in the United States of classified and proprietary 
technology. There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal 
export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Israel.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions (AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d)), and the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
 
  Six Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
5  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
9 
 
 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I conclude that none of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. Appellant did not establish it is unlikely he will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of his daughter and his in-laws and 
the U.S. interests.  
 
In light of Israel’s aggressive posture in the collection of sensitive and proprietary 
information in the United States, Applicant’s close relationship with his daughter and in-
laws creates a risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion by the 
Israeli government. His frequent contact and close relationship with his daughter and in-
laws could potentially force him to choose between the United States and Israeli 
interests. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant is a U.S. born citizen. He served in 
the Air Force two years, and except for the four years he lived in Israel, he has lived in 
the United States all his life. However, AG ¶ 8(b) does not mitigate the security 
concerns raised. When balancing Applicant’s favorable information against his acquiring 
Israeli citizenship at age 32, his continuous exercise of Israeli dual citizenship, and his 
intent to live in Israel (albeit 50% of the year), there remains a potential conflict of 
interest. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant’s behavior shows preference for Israel. His close contact with his 
daughter and in-laws creates a risk of foreign exploitation because of the Israeli 
government’s active collection of sensitive U.S. economic, industrial, and proprietary 
information. Available information sustains a conclusion that there is a risk that the 
Israeli government may attempt to exploit Applicant directly, or by exploiting Applicant’s 
relatives. Applicant’s situation creates a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s 
obligations to protect sensitive information and his desire/obligation to help himself, or 
his family were they under exploitation by a foreign interest. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
On balance, Applicant’s favorable information is summarized as follows. 
Applicant is a loyal and proud American. He served in the U.S. Air Force two years, and 
except for the four year period he lived in Israel, he has lived in the United States all his 
life. Available evidence suggests he is a valuable employee of a government contractor 
providing important services for government agencies. There is no evidence Applicant 
has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. There is 
no evidence he has ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the 
United States, or that he lacks honesty and integrity.  
 
On the other hand, there are circumstances that weigh against Applicant in the 
whole person analysis: Applicant received educational and economic benefits from the 
Israeli government, and became an Israeli citizen. As of the day of his hearing, he was 
exercising several of the rights and privileges of an Israeli citizen, including possessing 
an Israeli identification card and access to Israeli travel documents. He also is entitled, 
among other benefits, to educational, medical, social welfare, and economic benefits 
from the Israeli government. After he retires, he and his wife intend to live 50% of the 
 
11 
 
 
time in Israel and the other half of the year in the United States. Applicant stated he 
would “loathe” surrendering his Israeli citizenship.  
 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant’s behavior and close relationship 
with his relatives in Israel raise a doubt about his preference for Israel over the United 
States and create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. “Because of the 
extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong presumption against granting a 
security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it is deemed best to err on the 
side of the government’s compelling interest in security by denying or revoking [a] 
clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990).  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns arising from his 
becoming an Israeli citizen, exercising his Israeli citizenship, and his relationship and 
contacts with Israeli citizens and residents. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.e,    Against Applicant 
 and 2.f: 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.b-2.d:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
