 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-05613 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application (SF 86) on August 3, 
2008. On December 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny her application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on January 8, 2009; answered it on January 22, 
2009; and requested determination on the record without a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted the government’s written case on February 10, 2009. On February 
19, 2009, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, 
who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 27, 2009, but she did not submit any additional information. The case was 
assigned to me on April 23, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR (Government Exhibit (GX) 2), Applicant admitted all the 
allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h. Her admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old regional operations manager for a defense contractor. 
She has worked for her current employer since August 2008. Her SF 86 indicates she 
received a State Department clearance in September 2007, but she has never held a 
clearance from the Department of Defense.  
 
 Applicant was married in March 1997, and divorced in September 1999. She has 
a 19-year-old son, a 17-year-old son, and a 15-year-old daughter, none of whom reside 
with her. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges she owes a child support arrearage of about $24,646. In 
response to DOHA interrogatories, she submitted what appears to be a voucher from 
the local Division of Support Enforcement, dated December 19, 2003, reflecting a 
refund of $35.54 (GX 6 at 11-12). She has submitted no evidence of the current status 
of her child support account. 
 
 Applicant’s SF 86 reflects employment by various employers from October 1998 
until her current employment began in August 2008. She was unemployed from 
December 2001 to April 2002, January to June 2003, June to November 2004, and May 
2006 to March 2007. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b arose when Applicant and an ex-boyfriend jointly 
purchased a truck, and the ex-boyfriend failed to make payments. After the creditor 
refused to accept late payments from Applicant, the vehicle was repossessed. Applicant 
refuses to pay this debt. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g arose when Applicant purchased a car and found 
it was defective. When the seller refused to repair it under the warranty, Applicant 
surrendered the car, and the creditor obtained a judgment against her (GX 7). She 
refuses to pay this debt. 
 
 Applicant denied owing the tuition debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, claiming it was paid. 
She has not produced any documentation of payment.  
 
 3
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the debts alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Cell phone $272 Unpaid GX 2, GX 4, GX 5 
1.b Car repossession $14,166 Unpaid GX 2, GX 4-6 
1.c Collection account $244 Unpaid GX 2, GX 4 
1.d Child support $24,646 Unpaid GX 2,GX 4 
1.e Collection account $1,084 Unpaid GX 2, GX 4 
1.f College tuition $480 Unpaid GX 4, GX 5 
1.g Car loan (judgment) $8,742 Unpaid GX 2, GX 4-7 
1.h Satellite TV $72 Paid GX 4 at 1, GX 6 at 9 
1.i Utility bill $155 Unpaid GX 2, GX 5 
1.j Utility bill $224 Unpaid GX 2, GX 5 at 6 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in response to DOHA 
interrogatories on August 20, 2008. It reflects net monthly income of $3,260, expenses 
of $1,753, debt payments of $50, and a net remainder of $1,457. She owns a 2001 
truck that is paid for (GX 6 at 14).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 4
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling about $50,085. The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG 
¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 
19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) 
is raised when there is Aconsistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
 5
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ Applicant’s financial history raises these 
three disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). If any of the three 
disjunctive prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established 
unless the conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” This mitigating condition is not established because 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, not yet satisfied, and did not arise under 
unusual conditions.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s periods of unemployment were 
beyond her control, but she has been continuously employed for more than two years 
and has done virtually nothing to address the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence of financial 
counseling and her situation is not under control. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant provided proof that the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h was paid. She asserted in her answer to the SOR that she was 
making payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.i, but she presented 
no documentation to support her assertion. She has refused to pay the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g. This mitigating condition is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Although 
Applicant disagrees with some of the debts, she provided no documented proof of the 
 6
basis for her dispute. There is no evidence she has asked to have any debts deleted 
from her credit reports. This mitigating condition is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, gainfully employed, and earning enough to have a 
substantial net remainder each month. Because she requested a determination on the 
record, my ability to assess her candor, sincerity, and credibility has been limited. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating 
all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns based on her financial history. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 7
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
