                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05588 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On January 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 29, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 
2009, and DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on the same day. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on March 11, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 31. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through D. Department Counsel did not object and they were admitted. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 20, 2009.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 2007. He 
graduated from high school in 1999 and attended college, but did not earn a degree. He 
is married and has two children.1  
 
 Applicant admitted the following: 
 
 On February 2, 2005, he was charged with Driving Vehicle on Highway at Speed 
Exceeding the Limit. He was fined $140. 
 
 On October 11, 2004, he was charged with Simple Assault. He pled no contest 
and was fined $50. 
 
 Applicant held a DoD secret security clearance from July 1998 to October 22, 
2002. On October 22, 2002, he was separated from the Army National Guard for 
misconduct due to abuse of illegal drugs, after he tested positive for marijuana. 
Applicant used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance.2 
 
 In July 2002, Applicant was charged with (1) Driving, Attempting to Drive a 
Vehicle While Under the Influence (DWI); (2) Driving, Attempt to Drive Vehicle While 
Impaired by Alcohol; (3) Driving Vehicle on Highway at Speed Exceeding Limit; (4) 
Attempting to Drive to Elude Uniformed Police by Failing to Stop Vehicle; (5) Turning Off 
Vehicle Lights to Avoid Identification; (6) Failure to Pass Around Rotary Traffic Island to 
Right of Island; and (7) Person Driving Motor Vehicle on a Suspended Out of State 
License. He was found guilty of (2), (3), (4) and (7) and sentenced to 10 days in jail, of 
which six were suspended.3  
 
 On July 3, 2001, he was charged with (1) Purchase etc. of Alcoholic Beverages 
by a Minor; (2) Driving Without a License; and (3) Driving While Operator’s Privileges 
Suspended or Revoked. He was found guilty of all three offenses and ordered to pay 
fines and costs totaling approximately $577. 
 
1 Tr. 93-95. 
 
2 Tr. 96-97. 
 
3 Tr. 86-93; SOR 1. d lists the date of offense as July 18, 2002. He went to court in February 
2003.  
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 On May 18, 2001, he was charged with Bad Checks. He was ordered to pay 
restitution and was fined $50. 
 
 On April 21, 2001, he was charged with Bad Checks. He pled guilty and was 
fined $50. 
 
 On December 20, 2000, he was charged with Bad Checks and was ordered to 
pay restitution and costs.  
 
 On August 7, 2000, he was charged with Driving While Operator’s Privileges 
Suspended or Revoked. He was found guilty and fined $200. 
 
 On July 24, 2000, he was charged with Driving While Operating Privileges 
Suspended or Revoked. He was found guilty and fined $200.  
 
 On February 15, 2000, he was charged with Speed Exceeding Limit. He was fine 
$80.50. 
 
 On December 29, 1998, he was charged with Purchase Etc. Alcohol by Minor. 
He pled guilty and was fined $175. 
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) on November 7, 
2007. In response to question 23 inquiring about his police record, Applicant admitted 
he was charged in July 2002 and went to court in February 2003 for Driving While 
Impaired and with a suspended license. He did not list all of the other offenses he was 
charged with or convicted as of that day. He did not divulge the additional charges when 
he was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management Investigator (OPM) on 
December 18, 2007. He was interviewed again on March 6, 2008, and questioned why 
he failed to list his other alcohol-related offenses. He stated he should have revealed 
them, but thought the time frame was five years. He stated that if he wanted to conceal 
the information he would not have disclosed the Driving While Impaired charge. He also 
stated that he completely forgot about the other charges and that all of the other 
charges except the Driving While Impaired charge were dismissed.4 This is contrary to 
the court records that document he was convicted of Driving While Impaired, eluding a 
uniformed police officer, turning off his lights to avoid identification, and driving on a 
suspended license. He stated in his interview that he did not disclose the other charges 
because he thought they were trivial compared to the Driving While Impaired and they 
were all dismissed. He acknowledged he was aware of his past offenses and did not 
forget them.5  
 
Applicant also failed to list in response to question 23 the charges from 
December 29, 1998, for purchasing alcohol as a minor and the July 3, 2001, charges for 
purchasing alcohol as a minor and driving with a suspended license. He explained that 
4 GE 4 at page 2. 
 
5 Tr. 74-83; GE 4. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
he did not know why he failed to list these offenses. He explained that he had not 
purchased alcohol, but rather had consumed it as a minor, but the charges list the term 
“etcetera” which includes consumption. He admitted he was driving on a suspended 
license and had done so on other occasions with the suspension. He understood he 
was not supposed to drive. He drove to and from work for approximately a year while 
his license was suspended. He also drove other times. Applicant’s driver’s license was 
suspended from June 2000 to January 2005, except for the time between November 
2003 and January 2004, when it was reinstated. His suspensions were imposed due to 
the various offenses he committed and because he continued to violate his 
suspension.6 
 
 Applicant did not disclose that the reason he was discharged from the National 
Guard was due to his illegal drug abuse. Question 23(e) asks if he was subject to 
disciplinary action under the Uniform Code of Military Justice. Apparently, Applicant did 
not receive disciplinary action for his drug use while in the military, but rather was 
discharged for misconduct and received a General Discharge. There is no evidence to 
support he received disciplinary action. Therefore, he was not required to list any action 
in this section of his SCA. He did, however, fail to disclose on his SCA that he used 
drugs while he held a security clearance. He stated he was unaware that he had a 
clearance at the time. He thought he only had the clearance when he was actually 
serving on active duty with his reserve unit.7 I do not find his explanation regarding this 
failure to be credible. 
 
 In response to Question 23(f) inquiring if in the last seven year Applicant had 
been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in the other 
sections of the question, he answered “no”. He failed to list he had been charged with 
simple assault on October 11, 2004, and received a fine. He admitted he was arrested, 
fingerprinted, photographed and spent the night in jail. He hired an attorney and worked 
out a plea deal. The case was dismissed. He stated he later disclosed the information 
during his background interview.8 
 
 In response to Question 24(a) inquiring if Applicant had used illegal drugs in the 
last seven years or since he was 16, whichever was shorter he failed to disclose he had 
used illegal drugs in November 2001. Applicant stated he miscalculated the years and 
said he had previously listed it on an earlier SCA.9 Applicant completed a Questionnaire 
for Public Trust Position (SF 85P) dated February 6, 2003. Question 21 of the SF 85P 
asked if in the last year he had illegally used a controlled substance. He answered “no.” 
He was discharged from the National Guard for drug abuse on October 22, 2002. It is 
possible that it was more than a year since he had used illegal drugs and his answer 
6 Tr. 32-43; GE 3, 12, 13, and 14. 
 
7 Tr. 23, 96-99. 
 
8 Tr. 65-71; AE 5, 10 and 11. 
 
9 Tr. 22-23, 62-65; GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
was truthful. However, it is inconsistent with his explanation regarding the omissions on 
his 2007 SCA that he previously provided the information on the earlier SF 85P 
questionnaire, which did not have this information. He then stated that he completed a 
totally different SCA at an earlier date that included the omitted information. He did not 
retain a copy of this application and the government did not have it in its possession. I 
did not find Applicant’s testimony credible.10  
 
Applicant also failed to disclose on the 2003 SF 85P the Driving While Impaired 
charges from July 2002, and other offenses from July 3, 2001, August 7, 2000, July 24, 
2000, and December 29, 1998. (See above paragraphs for the specific charges)11 His 
explanation for why he did not divulge on his SF 85P that he had been arrested for 
various charges in July 2002 was because he believed he was not charged yet and he 
had not been to court at that point. However, he admitted he knew he had been 
arrested, had been handcuffed, placed in a police cruiser, photographed and 
fingerprinted, and had received a notice in the mail about the charges. He also 
explained the reason he did not disclose the Driving While Impaired incident was 
because he was distraught over the death of his brother, six months earlier, in a single 
car accident. He explained the reason he did not disclose the other offenses from July 
2002 were because they were traffic violations and he did not pay a fine. He learned 
from the investigator that fines had been imposed, but suspended, and he should have 
listed them. Applicant stated he did not know why he did not list the July 3, 2001 
offense.12 I do not find any of his explanations credible. 
 
 Applicant did not list the three bad check offenses on his 2003 SF 85P because 
he stated he did not realize he had been charged criminally. Applicant did not have an 
explanation for why he did not think he was charged criminally when he received court 
documents in the mail. Although Applicant never appeared in court, he admitted that he 
pled guilty and was fined three times between 2000 and 2001 for bad check charges. 
He provided conflicting testimony about whether he made restitution before he received 
the summons. He verified he was notified by mail of the court’s finding. He also 
provided confusing testimony about whether he paid the fines.13  
 
 Applicant was arrested four times for driving with a suspended or revoked license 
from 2000 to 2002. He does not remember many of the incidents. He does recall being 
pulled over by the police, but does not think he was arrested. His explanation for driving 
on a suspended license was, “I still have bills to pay.” He did not know why he did not 
list these offenses on his 2003 SF 85P. He then testified he did not list them because he 
was a minor.14  Applicant was over 18 in 2000. 
10 Tr. 22-23, 57-62; GE 1, 2 and 4. 
 
11 SOR 1.d, 1.f, 1.j, 1.k. and 1.m. 
 
12 Tr. 23-32, 56. 
 
13 Tr. 44-47. 
 
14 Tr. 46-54. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Applicant stated he did not deliberately or intentionally fail to divulge the 
information required on his SCA and SF 85F. He does not know why he did not list 
certain offenses. Regarding some omissions, he believed he did not have to list them 
because of a five-year period. He is not sure why he thought there was a five-year 
period. Regarding other omissions, he explained he misread the questions, forgot about 
the offenses, or thought he did not have to disclose them because the charges were 
dismissed or he only paid fines.15  
 
 Applicant testified he made mistakes and used poor judgment. He has since 
matured. He is a family man now and is devoted to providing the best life he can for his 
family. He does not drink to intoxication. Applicant volunteers his time at a mental health 
center and has taken a mission trip with his church to build homes.16  
 
 Applicant provided character statements from coworkers, a supervisor, a friend, 
and a family member. He is considered an exceptionally competent employee, a quick 
learner, and very dependable. He has a strong work ethic and is a devoted family man. 
He is also considered trustworthy, honest, and a man of integrity.17 Applicant provided 
photographs of awards he received from his employer.18 
 
 I find Applicant intentionally and deliberately failed to divulge important 
information on both his SCA and SF 85P. His testimony was not credible for why on two 
difference documents he failed to provide complete disclosure of important information 
about his past. His explanations for his repeated omissions were not credible.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
 
15 Tr. 26-28. 
 
16 Tr. 100-103. 
 
17  Tr. 21-22; AE D. 
 
18 Tr. 20-22; AE A. 
 
7 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
8 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
I have considered all of the facts and find Applicant deliberately omitted 
concealed, misled, and falsified information on his SCA and his SF 85P. Applicant used 
illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. He committed alcohol-related offenses. 
He had his driver’s license suspended several times and ignored the suspensions and 
drove his vehicle. Although Applicant’s drug offense and some of his alcohol offenses 
were several years ago, I find, combined with all of his other offenses, his behavior and 
conduct demonstrate questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. I find all of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
9 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy , unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
Applicant did not make an effort to correct the omissions and falsifications on his 
SCA or his SF 85P before being confronted. He was not entirely truthful during his first 
interview, thereby continuing to mislead the investigator. Applicant’s explanations for his 
omissions were inconsistent and not believable.  
Applicant has a long history of violating the law. He was discharged from the 
military due to illegal drug use. He used the drugs while he held a security clearance. 
He has several alcohol-related offenses. He repeatedly had his driver’s license 
suspended, yet continued to drive. He did not grasp the importance of obeying the law, 
but rather rationalized his actions. Some of Applicant’s criminal offenses occurred 
several years ago. He believes he has matured and is now a responsible family man 
devoted to his family. Although that may be true, I have serious concerns about his 
failure to honestly and truthfully divulge all of his background information, which had he 
done so would have reflected a changed man. His numerous explanations and excuses 
for failing to provide complete and honest answers on both his SCA and SF 85P are a 
cause of concern. His inconsistent answers and omissions, along with his history of 
violating the law are not minor issues nor were his actions infrequent. I find they cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant has not provided 
sufficient evidence to convince me he has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man devoted to 
his family. He has a good work record. Applicant has a significant history of rules 
violations, including use of marijuana while in the National Guard and holding a security 
clearance, repeated alcohol-related offenses, driving while impaired, and repeatedly 
driving on a suspended license. Although many of these violations could be attributed to 
his age and maturity at the time of the offenses, he did not truthfully divulge all of his 
past indiscretions and offenses on his 2007 SCA and 2003 SF 85P. His lack of candor 
and inconsistent answers raise security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph    1.p:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs  1.q-1.t:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
