                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07479 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 28, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On September 16, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
1  FORM Item 4. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or revoked. 
 
On October 14, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 2). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 23, 2008, was provided to 
her by letter dated December 29, 2008. Applicant signed the receipt for the DOHA 
transmittal letter on January 8, 2009. She was afforded a period of 30 days to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In her response 
to the FORM, Applicant submitted a one-page handwritten letter with explanations 
about some of the SOR allegations, and a notarized letter from her ex-husband. DOHA 
received her response to the FORM on February 23, 2009. The case was assigned to 
me on March 12, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.i. She failed to 
admit or deny SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.h, and I considered all of them denied. She denied 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.c. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old courier-driver working for a defense contractor.3 She 
married her spouse in November 1970 and they were divorced in July 1999. She has 
five children, two daughters, ages 30 and 23 and three sons, ages 28, 21, and four. She 
received her real estate license in October 2006. Except for her real estate courses, she 
disclosed no other education.  
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since March 2000. She worked for 
two government contractors during this period, first as a file clerk from June 2001 to 
October 2004, and then as a courier-driver from July 2005 to the present for her current 
employer (Item 4).  
 
In her security clearance application, Applicant disclosed she filed for bankruptcy 
protection in August 2003. She also disclosed having one debt that was over 180 days 
delinquent at the time she completed the e-QIP. Her security clearance background 
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3  Item 4 (2007 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
investigation addressed her financial problems, and included the review of her March 
and August 2008 credit bureau reports (CBR).  
 
In her answer to the SOR and in her response to the FORM, Applicant claimed 
not to have knowledge of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. She said she wanted 
to contact these creditors to resolve both debts and was not able to do so because she 
does not know who to contact. She presented no documentary or corroborating 
evidence of any efforts taken to resolve these debts.  
 
Applicant’s judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d (entered against her in March 2003), 
was included in her December 2003 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. Applicant stated 
she had to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2003, “because of the situation 
[her] (1999) divorce put [her] in” (answer to the SOR). She provided no further details or 
information about her financial problems before her bankruptcy filing or thereafter.  
 
Concerning the state tax liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.h, Applicant 
stated she was not aware of them. She explained that over 10 years ago, she and her 
ex-husband owned a pharmacy business with a third partner. She was a stockholder 
and the vice president of the corporation, but she was never involved in the day-to-day 
operation of the business. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant first explained she did 
not disclose the liens in her e-QIP because her ex-husband assured her that the tax 
liens had been taken care of, and that they were more than seven years old and outside 
of the requested information. She then stated that she found out about the tax liens the 
first time she had to pull up her credit report (CBR) after her divorce (Item 3). It is not 
clear from her explanation when she looked at her CBRs and discovered the liens. It 
appears, however, it was sometime around 2003 when she filed her bankruptcy.  
 
According to her ex-husband, most of the ten years they were in business, 
Applicant was a homemaker and took care of their kids. He averred Applicant had no 
knowledge the business owned any back taxes at the time it was dissolved. Her ex-
husband claimed that their business partner paid all back taxes and was granted a 
waiver of penalties and interests. He and Applicant applied for a similar waiver last fall, 
and he expects the waiver will be granted in March-April 2009.4  
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 1.i, Applicant admitted the debt. She explained she made the 
mistake of cosigning a car note for one of her daughters. Her daughter was unable to 
pay the car note, and they voluntarily turned in the car to the seller. The debt is 
outstanding. Applicant provided no explanation as to what she intends to do to resolve 
this debt. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, alleged that Applicant falsified question 27 of her January 
2008 security clearance application (asking whether in the last seven years she had any 
liens filed against her for failing to pay taxes or other debts, or any unpaid judgments), 
 
4  See Applicant’s ex-husband statement, dated February 2009, included with her response to the 
FORM. 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
when she answer “No,” and failed to disclose the liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 
1h, and the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
Applicant claimed she was not aware of the liens for various reasons: she was 
never involved in the day-to-day operation of the business; her ex-husband assured her 
that the tax liens had been taken care of; the liens were more than seven years old; and 
she found out about the tax liens the first time she had to pull up her credit report after 
her divorce. Applicant’s contradictory explanations fail to convincingly show she was not 
aware of the tax liens when she completed her January 2008 security clearance 
application. Concerning the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, Applicant did not pay it. 
However, it was discharged as part of her 2003 bankruptcy. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 2.c, I find that Applicant falsified question 28 of her security 
clearance application (asking whether in the last seven years she had been over 180 
days delinquent on any debts or whether at the time she was 90 days delinquent on any 
debt), because she answer “No,” and failed to disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
through 1.h.5 As previously discussed, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show she 
had no knowledge of the alleged debts, tax liens, and judgment at the time she 
submitted her e-QIP. Moreover, Applicant’s contradictory explanations are not credible.  
 
 
Applicant considers herself to be an honest, hard working person, with high 
integrity. She averred she did not and would not lie about anything. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5  Regarding SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant’s last action on this debt occurred in June 2004, and her last 
action on SOR ¶ 1.c occurred in 2001 (CBRs). It is possible she was not aware of these debts, or that the 
debts were included in her 2003 bankruptcy. 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
6  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7  “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent/charged off accounts, a judgment, and tax 
liens totaling approximately $47,583. Except for her 2003 bankruptcy, Applicant 
presented no evidence of efforts to pay or resolve the alleged financial obligations, 
many of which have been delinquent for many years. I find that SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d were 
probably included in her 2003 bankruptcy discharge. Considering the sparse record 
evidence, I find that Applicant’s delinquent debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.i remain 
outstanding. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, AG ¶ 19(c): a 
history of not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to raise the full applicability of any 
mitigating condition. Her financial problems are ongoing and her evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely that they will recur. Her 
financial problems and her failure to fully address the security concerns cast doubt on 
Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence that could establish circumstances beyond 
her control contributing to her inability to pay his debts, i.e., her divorce, and being a 
single mother of five children. AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but only partially. Applicant’s 
evidence is not sufficient to show how her 1999 divorce continues to impact her current 
financial situation, and whether she acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Although she has been consistently employed since March 2000, she presented little 
evidence of effort to contact creditors or to resolve her debts beyond her 2003 
bankruptcy from the day she acquired the debts to the day he answered the FORM. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because, there are no clear indications that her 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. Her inability to pay even 
small debts show she was financially overextended. Considering Applicant substantial 
debt, she also failed to establish that she is no longer financially overextended. She also 
failed to present any evidence that she received financial counseling and that her 
financial problems are not likely to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not 
reasonably raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well trained 
woman, and a good mother. She has been successful working for two defense 
contractors during a combined period of approximately six and one-half years. There is 
no evidence of any security violation, or that she is not a good, reliable and competent 
worker. These factors show some responsibility and mitigation. 
 
On the other hand, there are more substantial circumstances that weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis such as the lack of credibility of her conflicting 
explanations. Also, when she completed her security clearance application, she 
deliberately failed to disclose her full financial situation. Considering the number and 
aggregate value of debts and liens, Applicant knew or should have known of her debts 
and liens at the time she completed her security clearance application.  
 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant’s financial behavior and personal 
conduct raise doubt about her ability to have access to classified information. “Because 
of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong presumption against 
granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it is deemed best to err 
on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by denying or revoking 
[a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990).  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from her financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.e - 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a & 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
