1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04599
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on August 29,
2007. On November 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 20, 2008 and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
and I received the case assignment on January 30, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on February 3, 2009, for a hearing on February 19, 2008. It was amended on
February 9 for a February 18, 2009, hearing and convened as scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government offered six exhibits (Exhs. 1-6) that were admitted
in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted two exhibits (Exhs. A and B) that
were admitted without objection. He testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 26, 2009. I granted Applicant’s request to
keep the record open until March 6, 2009, to submit additional evidence. A post-hearing
submission was received within the specified time after the conclusion of the hearing. It
contained two separate letters of support from his supervisor and a colleague (Exhs. C -
1 and 2). The government had no objection to the submission and the documents were
admitted in evidence without objection.
Procedural Rulings
At the opening of the hearing, the government moved to withdraw the allegations
under Guideline E, Applicant had no objection and the motion was granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer, Applicant admitted all of the 22 allegations in the SOR concerning
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2001 and delinquent debts of over $30,000. Two of them
may be duplicates. He attached a statement as a part of his answer. He denied that the
allegations showed that he was at risk for committing illegal acts, and breaching
national security. 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor working as an
electronic technician since March 2008. for his present employer He served nine years
in the Marine Corps between 1995 and 2004. He was unemployed for four months
before obtaining work in 2004 for another defense contractor. He worked there in a
similar position until his present employment. He does not have a college degree but
has accumulated enough hours that he will have one in a year. He has been married for
13 years and has two teen age children. 
In 2001, while on active duty, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy which
was dismissed in 2003 by the trustee (SOR ¶ 1.a.). The principal reason for the
bankruptcy was the purchase of a home from which he and his family moved when he
re-joined the Marine Corps. He and his wife let his parents-in-law use the house and
pay no rent since they had very little income. The result was that Applicant fell behind
on mortgage payments of $450 per month since he was paying for his former home and
his present home. His parents-in-law later became employed and also became eligible
for social security payments. They were then able to buy the house they occupied and
assume the mortgage payments. The alleged $8,572 debt (SOR ¶ 1.r.) disputed by
3
Applicant arose from this transaction. While it may have once been owed to the
mortgagee, his parents-in-law assumed any deficient mortgage payments when they
purchased the house from him. 
The debts alleged in the SOR arose from various accounts. One is for a cell
phone in the amount of $856 on which no action has been taken (SOR ¶ 1.b.). It may be
duplicated in another account listed for over $900 about which he has no other
information. He has had no contact with the creditor (SOR ¶ 1.n.). The next debt is for a
big screen TV in the amount of $8,254. He forgot about this debt. He believes it may
have been repossessed as it now shows on his credit report as owing $3,000 (SOR ¶
1.c.). Two debts totaling over $5,000 are for military loans now charged off (SOR ¶¶1.d.
and e.). One debt is to an animal hospital for treatment of his dog for $183 which he
intended to pay the day following the hearing (SOR ¶ 1.f.). He has seven medical bills in
collection for varying amounts (SOR ¶¶ g.,h.,l.,o.,p.,t., and u.). One debt is for the
purchase of tires for over $1,000 in 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.m.). Four debts are credit card
related about which he has little information (SOR ¶¶ I., j.,k.,and s.). Two other alleged
debts are for traffic fines imposed by the city where he once lived 200 miles from where
he now lives. Two of them may be duplicates (SOR ¶¶ 1.q. and v.). He needs to go to
court in that city to resolve the debts but has not done so (Tr. 30-59). 
Applicant has settled one debt of $142 for a returned check issued by his wife
that was not on the SOR (Exh. A). Two other small debts for $14 and $42 have been
paid to a collection agency but do not appear to be on the SOR. The first may be a
portion of the animal hospital debt referenced above (Exh. B). The collection letter also
listed several other debts four of which are medical debts that appear to be part of the
seven noted above. He intends to pay the collection agency as funds are available. 
Applicant was raised in a family that provided him with funds when he needed
help, paid his bills in college, and at other times. He acknowledges that his current
financial situation arose because of his “irresponsibility” (Tr. 67), and “bad judgment”
(Tr. 15). Although he had several delinquent medical bills, no one is very large and
there is no evidence that they are the proximate cause of his indebtedness.  
Applicant’s annual salary from his employment is approximately $52,000. His
wife is employed and her annual salary is approximately $32,000. He had a 401(k)
account of $4,000 through his employer but withdrew it in the hope of making a down
payment on a home. However, he discovered that his credit rating was too low to do so.
He now intends to use the funds to pay some of his debts. 
Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors and a colleague for his work ethic,
dedication to accomplishing the mission of his employer, and willingness to go beyond
the requirements of his job (Exhs. C-1 and 2).. He has held a security clearance since
his military service. 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), an "inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), "a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise
security concerns.”
Applicant did incur substantial delinquent debts and was the subject of two federal
tax liens and a home foreclosure. Thus, the conditions required were established by the
government sufficient to raise a security concern. 
The guideline also includes examples of mitigating conditions (MC) that could
mitigate security concerns arising from financial considerations. Under AG ¶ 20(b), the
security concern may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Although he had some medical
expenses, and several months of unemployment when he left active duty, there is no
indication that these factors were the cause of his indebtedness. He has now been
employed for over four years with little resolution of most of his debts. Thus, I conclude
that he has failed to act responsibly and the mitigating condition is not applicable. 
Under AG ¶ 20(d) the security concern may be mitigated when the individual
initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. From
the lack of evidence presented to establish this mitigating condition, it is not applicable. 
Under AG ¶ 20(e) the security concern may be mitigated when the individual has
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt that is the cause of the
problem, and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. He has provided evidence of a
reasonable basis for disputing two of four allegations as duplicates but two are still
outstanding. He has established a reasonable answer to the allegation relating to his
mortgage payments on his former home, the largest of his debts. This mitigating
condition is applicable to those three debts.
6
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case.
Applicant is a mature adult with significant responsibility in his work for which he is
highly regarded. His effort to help his parents-in-law was commendable but the problems
arising from that effort were resolved several years ago. The present debts arose several
years ago, and very little has been done to resolve them until recently. He acknowledges
that the debts arose and have not been resolved through his own lack of responsibility.
He is an impressive young man who has considerable potential and has sufficient
income to begin a program to resolve the debts. There is no reason to think he would
compromise national security but his actions to date to resolve his financial problems do
not meet the minimum requirements under the guideline to justify a grant of a security
clearance. Thus, it is premature to grant him a security clearance at this time.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.-p.:  Against applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.q. and r.:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.s.-v.:  Against Applicant
7
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is denied.
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge
