                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06631 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant currently retains a valid Tunisian passport. He is close to his mother 
and she continues to live in Tunisia. He owns property in Tunisia. He went to Tunisia at 
least four times in the last three years. Applicant failed to mitigate foreign preference 
and foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 13, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 4). On December 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and 
B (Foreign Influence). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On January 15, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (GE 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 27, 2009, was provided to 
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 On April 2, 2009, Applicant provided a response 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 22, 2009. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel asked me to take administrative notice concerning materials 
related to Tunisia (FORM at 3). Department Counsel offered supporting documents to 
show detail and context for those facts in the administrative notice request (Ex. I to III—
listed in FORM at 6).  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Applicant did not object to Department Counsel’s request for administrative 
notice. Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice is granted with respect to 
the facts in the section labeled “Tunisia” on page five of this decision.    
 
 
 
 
 
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated March 5, 2009; 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated March 9, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
SOR Amendments 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the letter 
designating the pertinent Adjudicative Guideline citation in paragraph 1 from “B” to “C,” 
and to transfer the allegation currently in SOR ¶ 2.e (stating, “As of November 5, 2007, 
you plan to start contributing to the Tunisia system that is similar to the United States 
Social Security System.”) from underneath the Foreign Influence Guideline to 
underneath the Foreign Preference Guideline and re-designating it SOR ¶ 1.e (FORM 
at 10).  Applicant did not object to Department Counsel’s proposed SOR amendments, 
and they are granted. I changed and initialed and dated the changes on the SOR (GE 
1). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations and 
provided some explanations. He discussed the reasons why he believes he should have 
access to classified information. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant was born in Tunisia in 1974.3 He attended college in Tunisia from 1994 
to 1997, and earned a Bachelor of Science degree. He attended a university in Saudi 
Arabia from 1997 to 1998, and then transferred to a U.S. university, which he attended 
from 1999 to 2000. He earned a Master of Science degree in 2000. He attended 
another U.S. university from 2003 to 2007, and earned a Ph.D. in 2007.  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen on September 15, 2004. He received a U.S. 
passport on September 24, 2004. From August 2007 to the present, he has been 
employed by a government contractor. He has never married. He has never served in 
the U.S. military. He has never been charged with any felony, any firearms or 
explosives offense, or any offense related to alcohol or drugs. He has not been arrested 
or charged with any minor or misdemeanor-type offenses in the last seven years. He 
has not used any illegal drugs in the last seven years. He has not had any debts 
delinquent over 180 days, petitioned for bankruptcy, unpaid judgments, or unpaid liens 
in the last seven years. 
 
 
 
 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3Applicant’s 2007 SF 86 (GE 5) is the source for the facts in this paragraph and the next 
paragraph. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference4 
 
Applicant admits dual citizenship with the United States and Tunisia (SOR ¶ 1.a; 
GE 3 at 3; GE 4 at 8, 25; GE 5 at 7). Applicant’s Tunisian passport was issued on 
January 7, 2005, and it will not expire until January 6, 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.b; GE 3 at 3; GE 4 
at 25; GE 5 at 8, 20). Applicant used his Tunisian passport to enter and exit Tunisia in 
2005, 2006, and 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.c; GE 3 at 4; GE 4 at 24-25; GE 5 at 8). He continues 
to retain his currently valid Tunisian passport (SOR ¶ 1.d; GE 3 at 3; GE 4 at 26; GE 5 
at 8, 32, 33), even though he has had a U.S. passport since 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c; GE 3 at 
3; GE 4 at 7, 8, 25; GE 5 at 20).  
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Tunisia and she lives in Tunisia (SOR ¶ 2.a; GE 
4 at 23-24). His father is deceased (GE 4 at 22). Two of his brothers and one sister are 
citizens of Tunisia and live in Tunisia (SOR ¶ 2.b; GE 4 at 23-24; GE 5 at 8). Applicant’s 
FORM response emphasized the close relationship he has with his mother, and how 
grateful he is to his parents for raising him and nurturing him through his formative 
years. 
 
Applicant went to Tunisia in May 2005, December 2006, July 2006, and July 
2007 to visit his family (SOR ¶ 2.c; GE 3 at 4; GE 4 at 24-25; GE 5 at 7). He may have 
traveled to Tunisia after July 2007 to visit his family (SOR ¶ 2.c). For the 2005 and 
December 2006 visits to Tunisia he stayed for approximately a month, and for the July 
2006 visit to Tunisia, he stayed about three weeks (GE 5 at 7). Applicant owns two 
homes in Tunisia (one was inherited from his father), and he may at some point start 
contributing to the Tunisian pension system, which is equivalent to the United States’ 
Social Security system (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 2.d; GE 3 at 4; GE 4 at 25; GE 5 at 7-8).  
 
On September 24, 2008, Applicant discussed the issue of renunciation of his 
Tunisian citizenship and relinquishment of his Tunisian passport as follows: 
 
[I]t is a hard decision to make, especially [because] it involves my country 
of origin, the country where I grew up, where my mother lives, where my 
family resides, where I was initiated to [my] education, [and] where I have 
good memories.  I did mention [to the Office of Personnel Management 
investigator] that I did not make that decision yet and I would need to think 
about it [some] more.  .  .  .  Giving up my Tunisian citizenship is as hard 
as giving up my US citizenship, the citizenship of the country that 
embraced me, provided me with the opportunity to pursue higher 
education, the country that taught me good values and morals, the country 
that provided me with the opportunity to work for such big companies and 
with high caliber people, the country that taught me how to be optimistic 
and hope for [a] better future, and the country that made me who I am. I 
was really glad that I had the option to keep both citizenships and never 
had to give up either one.  .  .  .  Now, in [regard to] giving up my Tunisian 
 
4Applicant’s FORM response admitted the facts in SOR ¶¶ 2.a to 2.d. He also indicated he has 
not yet contributed to the Tunisian equivalent of the U.S. Social Security System (SOR ¶ 1.e).    
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
passport [if that] would result in me being deprived [of] my Tunisian 
citizenship, then I fall under the previous question regarding giving up my 
citizenship, which I already answered, otherwise (giving up my Tunisian 
passport would NOT result in me being deprived from my Tunisian 
citizenship), I do not mind giving it up and I just need to check the details 
of how I can enter Tunisia’s soil without [a] Tunisian passport. 
 
(Emphasis in original) GE 5 at 5. When Applicant responded to the FORM, on April 2, 
2009, he elaborated on his desire to retain his Tunisian passport: 
 
The concern expressed in this section has to do with the fact that I am 
(retaining) a Tunisian passport. As I mentioned in my response to the 
statement of reasons, the ONE and ONLY time I need and use my 
Tunisian passport is when entering and exiting the Tunisian soil. This is 
confirmed in the Department of State Counselor Information sheet that Mr. 
L[] presented, which says, “American citizens of Tunisian origin are 
expected to enter and exit Tunisia on their Tunisian passports. If a 
Tunisian American succeeds in entering using a US passport, he or she 
will still have to present a Tunisian passport to exit the country.” 
  
Tunisia 
 
Tunisia is a republic with a president and a single political party.  The diplomatic 
and military relationship between the United States and Tunisia has long been one of 
trust and mutual support, especially on curbing terrorism and crime. However, Tunisian 
government officials and security forces have occasionally violated the rights of political 
prisoners, and committed other human rights violations. Security forces aggressively 
monitor and question those suspected of threatening Tunisian security. The relationship 
between Tunisia and the United States briefly suffered when Israel acted aggressively 
against terrorists in the 1980s and when the United States was engaged in the First Gulf 
war in 1990. The Department of State notes that Tunisia has “open borders with Libya 
and Algeria” and lists kidnapping of tourists in the last 5-6 years as a concern. The 
current relationship between the United States and Tunisia is described as positive and 
warm.  
 
Applicant’s FORM response emphasizes that the Tunisian government is a close 
and stalwart friend of the United States. Applicant and his family have never had a 
problem with the Tunisian government. There is no evidence that the Tunisian 
government is concerned with Applicant or Applicant’s family. The relationship between 
Applicant and the Tunisian government is one of mutual respect.     
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence).  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. These conditions state, “10(a) exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a 
current foreign passport.” 
 
In 2005, Applicant applied for and was issued a Tunisian passport after becoming 
a U.S. citizen, even though he already had a currently valid U.S. passport. He used the 
Tunisian passport to enter and exit Tunisia. He continues to possess a currently valid 
Tunisian passport that will continue to be valid until January 2010, establishing AG ¶ 
10(a)(1). “Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 
F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990)). Because the government has raised foreign preference 
security concerns, the burden now shifts to Applicant to establish any appropriate 
mitigating conditions. Directive ¶ E3.1.15.       
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
Security officials did not authorize Applicant’s possession or use of a Tunisian 
passport, and he did not invalidate or relinquish his Tunisian passport as described in 
AG ¶¶ 11(d) and 11(e). His Tunisian passport was not surrendered to his security 
officer. He obtained and used the Tunisian passport after he became a U.S. citizen.  If 
he had surrendered his Tunisian passport to his Facility Security Officer, I would have 
mitigated foreign preference security concerns under AG ¶ 11(e); however, because he 
did not do so, this security concern is not mitigated.   
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is mitigated because SOR ¶ 1.c essentially duplicates SOR ¶ 1.b, 
except Applicant’s possession of a valid U.S. passport and U.S. citizenship are added to 
SOR ¶ 1.c. Actually, his U.S. passport and U.S. citizenship tend to mitigate foreign 
preference concerns, and these connections to the United States do not weigh against 
Applicant’s worthiness to have access to classified information. Thus, I find “For 
Applicant” on page 13 of his decision.    
 
  SOR ¶ 1.e is mitigated because Applicant did not invest in the Tunisian 
equivalent to the U.S. Social Security System. 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions fully apply and foreign preference security 
concerns remain because of Applicant’s continued possession of a currently valid 
Tunisian passport, despite having ample opportunity to mitigate this concern. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s mother, two brothers and one sister, are citizens and residents of 
Tunisia. Applicant visited his mother and possibly his Tunisian siblings in 2005, 2006 
and 2007. The record does not indicate how often he communicates with his family 
living in Tunisia. There is no evidence that his relatives have connections to the 
Tunisian government or military. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has 
ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members. See ISCR Case No. 
01-03120 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).      
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. Tunisia’s cordial relationship to the 
United States, Tunisia’s opposition to terrorists, and the absence of any record that 
Tunisia uses espionage to target the United States, place a relatively low burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with family members living 
in Tunisia do not pose a security risk and he is not in a position to be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and his family living in Tunisia.  
 
On the other hand, human rights organizations have criticized the Tunisian 
government’s failure to adhere to human rights standards, and it is conceivable that 
Tunisian officials theoretically might target any Tunisian citizen or former Tunisian 
citizen living in Tunisia or the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
from the United States, should the relationship between Tunisia and the United States 
deteriorate, as it has several times in the past. 
 
Applicant’s connections to his mother, but not his siblings, living in Tunisia create 
a potential conflict of interest because his relationship with his mother is sufficiently 
close to raise a possible security concern about his desire to help his mother, who is 
living in Tunisia by providing classified, sensitive or protected information. There is 
insufficient record information about his relationships with his siblings living in Tunisia to 
determine there is a foreign influence security concern.    
 
Applicant owns two houses in Tunisia. These properties are sufficiently 
substantial to subject Applicant to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.  
Even after being advised of the security concern raised by ownership of these 
properties, he did not describe any action to divest himself of these properties.   
 
The government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationships and 
contacts with his mother living in Tunisia to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation. There is some evidence that the Tunisian government might 
commit human rights violations, and Applicant’s mother living in Tunisia is available 
should Tunisian officials seek to exploit her to obtain classified, sensitive or protected 
information. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(e) apply, requiring further review and analysis.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) cannot be applied with respect to his mother living in 
Tunisia. Applicant has a strong emotional bond with his mother living in Tunisia. 
Applicant emphasizes his close relationship with her in his FORM response, and this 
close relationship is sufficient to negate these mitigating conditions. Additionally, he was 
reluctant to surrender his Tunisian passport because he wanted it to be available should 
he need to go to visit his family living in Tunisia. Although Applicant’s close relationships 
with his mother living in Tunisia is an important positive reflection of his character, this 
same close relationship raises security concerns for possible foreign influence.       
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s family members living in Tunisia have been 
political activists or that they have high profile jobs with the Tunisian government, the 
military or any news media. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals or the 
Tunisian government have approached or threatened Applicant’s family members living 
in Tunisia for any reason. There is no evidence that his family members living in Tunisia 
currently engage in activities which would bring attention to them or that the Tunisian 
security forces, terrorists or other anti-U.S. elements are even aware of Applicant’s 
relationship with those family members. As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
these relatives would be targets for coercion or exploitation.  
 
Applicant’s relationships with his relatives in Tunisia, his frequent contacts with 
his mother, and the potential that the Tunisian government might violate his mother’s 
human rights should the relationship between the United States and the Tunisian 
government change and become hostile, all weigh against mitigating security concerns. 
See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with 
siblings in PRC “once every two or three  months” not to be casual and infrequent); 
ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with 
applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 times per year not casual and 
infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts 
with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months not casual and infrequent).     
 
Applicant’s connections to the United States have developed over the last 10 
years. Because they are more recent, they tend to be more important than his 
connections over more than 25 years to Tunisia. His U.S. connections tend to mitigate 
foreign interest security concerns. He has many friends and colleagues in the United 
States. He is a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. He swore an oath of allegiance to the 
United States when he became a U.S. citizen. He has a Ph.D. and is likely to make 
significant contributions to national security and his company in the future. All these 
circumstances provide some support for a conclusion that Applicant will recognize, 
resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group at 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
coercion or exploitation. I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is partially established and tends to 
partially, but not fully, mitigate foreign influence security concerns. There is sufficient 
lingering foreign influence security concern to find “Against Applicant” in the Formal 
Findings of this decision on page 13. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I hereby incorporate all of my comments 
under the preceding discussions of the four pertinent adjudicative guidelines into this 
section.  
There is some evidence tending to mitigate security concerns under the whole 
person concept. He has somewhat greater connections to the United States than to 
Tunisia. He moved to the United States ten years ago, and he became a U.S. citizen in 
2004. He swore an oath of allegiance to the United States. His dedication to his work 
and to the United States is a very positive indication of his good character and 
trustworthiness. He is loyal to the United States. Applicant’s record of good 
employment, the absence of derogatory information concerning financial problems and 
substance abuse and his law-abiding character weigh in his favor. There is no evidence 
of any security violation, or criminal activity.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept and the adjudicative 
guidelines is not sufficient to warrant access to classified information. The foreign 
preference security concern is substantial. After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant 
obtained a Tunisian passport. He used his Tunisian passport for his 2005 and 2006 
visits to Tunisia. He did not relinquish or surrender his Tunisian passport to his facility 
security official (FSO). He has two properties in Tunisia. He was informed of the security 
concerns raised by the Tunisian properties and he did not relinquish his interest in them. 
He has a very close relationship with his mother. Tunisian government officials might 
violate her human rights to put pressure on her to obtain classified, protected or 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
sensitive information. Terrorists might enter Tunisia and put pressure on his mother to 
obtain such information.      
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns.      
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
