 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08743 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On December 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 11, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 26, 2009, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on March 18, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
 
2 
 
which were received without objection. The Government also offered a demonstrative 
exhibit which was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were received without objection. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
ten pages of documents, which were marked AE I through K, and admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked HE II. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 27, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2005. He is a high school graduate and is taking 
courses on-line. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1996 to 2004. He has two 
Honorable Discharges and received a General Under Honorable Conditions Discharge 
in 2004. He deployed to Iraq with the Army in 2003. He deployed to Kuwait, Iraq, and 
Afghanistan with his current employer, in 2005 to 2006, and again in 2007. He was 
married from December 2001 until his divorce in February 2004. He married again in 
2005 and divorced in 2008. He married for a third time in February 2009. He has three 
stepchildren living with him and his wife.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted to SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, 1.m, 1.p, 1.v, 1.w, 1.y, 1.z, and 1.aa. The total amount 
owed for those ten debts is $22,630. He denied the remaining allegations. He also 
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant indicated that much of his financial problems can be traced to actions 
by his brother, cousin, and ex-wife. Applicant deployed to Iraq in 2003. He let his 
brother and cousin live in his apartment while he was deployed. He let them use his 
debit card and they were supposed to pay his bills and rent. He stated they did not pay 
the bills, wrote checks on his bank account without his permission which were returned 
for nonsufficient funds, and were evicted from the apartment for failing to pay the rent. 
He also stated that they charged items and opened accounts in his name without his 
permission. Applicant chose not to press charges against his family members. He 
stated that several of the medical debts were incurred by his ex-wife while he was 
deployed. He expected her to pay any deductible amount or co-payment and does not 
know why she did not pay the bills. He has retained a credit resolution company “to 
work on removing derogatory/inaccurate items off his credit report.” The company 
provides limited credit counseling.2  
 
 Applicant admitted to owing the delinquent debt of $135 to a collection company, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He testified that he was unsure what the debt was for, but he 
thought it might be a duplicate of the $72 debt to a utility company which was alleged in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-26, 49, 52-53, 57; GE 1; AE D. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-22, 27-28, 55-59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE E, J.  
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g. He denied SOR ¶ 1.b, which alleges a $229 debt to the same collection 
agency as that listed in ¶ 1.a. The two debts are listed on the credit report of March 10, 
2006, but not the three more recent credit reports in evidence. Applicant has not 
contacted the creditor to inquire about either debt. The credit resolution company did 
not dispute these two debts as they were not listed on the most recent credit reports.3   
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent debt of $3,810 to a collection company on 
behalf of a cellular telephone company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He testified that he 
had an account with the company but instead of sending him his monthly $38 bill, they 
sent him a bill of $3,800. He stated he has been disputing the bill with the company ever 
since. When he called the telephone company, he was told they had no information 
about the debt. This debt is listed on all the credit reports in evidence. The credit 
resolution company reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting resolution.”4   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a debt of $239 to a collection company. Applicant denied any 
knowledge of this debt. Applicant submitted a combined credit report dated October 3, 
2008, with his response to DOHA interrogatories. That credit report indicates the 
original debt was to a jewelry store. Applicant admitted to purchasing a necklace from 
the jewelry store, but believed he completed the payments to store. This debt is listed 
on the credit reports of March 10, 2006 and September 16, 2008. The combined credit 
report of October 3, 2008 lists the original debt under the jewelry company, but not 
under the collection company. The combined credit report of January 29, 2009 only lists 
the debt under the jewelry store and reports the debt was purchased by another lender, 
with a zero balance.5   
 
 Applicant denied any knowledge of the $927 debt to a collection company, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt is listed on the three most recent credit reports. The 
credit resolution company reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting 
resolution.”6   
 
 Applicant paid the $72 debt to a utility company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. He 
denied owing a debt of $156 to the same utility company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. He 
stated that he did not realize that there were two debts to the utility company. He has 
not contacted the utility company to determine the status of the $156 debt. The $156 
debt is listed on all the credit reports in evidence except the September 16, 2008 report. 
The credit resolution company reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting 
resolution.” Applicant also paid the $258 debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
different utility company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j.7     
                                                          
3 Tr. at 29-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
4 Tr. at 30-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
5 Tr. at 32-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G.  
 
6 Tr. at 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
7 Tr. at 35-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant admitted to owing the $370 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. He 
testified that he thought it was a payday loan that he took out before he deployed and 
then forgot about it. He has not paid the debt. He stated that he did not have the 
creditor’s telephone number but would attempt to obtain it from the credit resolution 
company. The credit resolution company is attempting to have the debt deleted from his 
credit report and reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting resolution.”8     
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a debt of $66 for a returned check. Applicant stated that he 
believed his brother may have written this check while he was deployed. He has not 
checked with the company to verify that he did not write the check. The debt is listed on 
all the credit reports in evidence except the September 16, 2008 report. The credit 
resolution company reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting resolution.”9  
 
 A debt of $405 to a collection company, on behalf of a cable television provider is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant stated that this debt was incurred by his brother and 
cousin without his authorization or permission while he was deployed. He indicated that 
he spoke with the cable company after he returned from deployment. The company 
agreed to credit the amount of the bill if he provided the company a copy of his military 
orders showing that he was in Iraq when the services were provided. He was unable to 
obtain a copy of the orders. This debt is listed on the credit reports of March 10, 2006 
and September 16, 2008, but not the two most recent credit reports.10   
 
 Applicant denied owing the $412 debt to an apartment landlord, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.l. He admitted that he lived in the apartment. He stated that he was late on one 
payment, but does not owe anything. He contacted the landlord after he saw the debt 
on the credit report. He stated that the landlord admitted that he did not owe anything 
but did not have an answer as to why the debt was listed as delinquent on his credit 
report. The debt is listed as a charge off on the credit reports of March 10, 2006 and 
October 3, 2008, but neither report lists a balance. It is not listed on the other two 
reports.11   
 
 Applicant admitted to owing the $686 delinquent debt to a collection company on 
behalf of a cellular telephone services company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. He has not 
paid the debt or contacted the creditor.12    
 
 Applicant denied any knowledge of the $91 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n, or the 
$1,250 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o. These debts appear to be duplicates. The $91 debt is 
listed on the credit report of October 3, 2008, with a $91 balance and a high balance of 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 36-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
9 Tr. at 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
10 Tr. at 39-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G.  
 
11 Tr. at 41-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G.  
 
12 Tr. at 42; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
$1,250. It also appears on the January 29, 2009 credit report. The $1,250 debt does not 
appear on any credit report after March 10, 2006. The credit resolution company 
reported the $91 debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting resolution.”13 
 
 Applicant admitted to owing the $5,376 delinquent debt to a company that 
provides loans to military members, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. He has not paid the debt. 
He indicated that he will contact the creditor to arrange a payment plan. The credit 
resolution company is attempting to have the debt deleted from his credit report and 
reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting resolution.”14       
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q alleges a $521 debt to a collection company. The original debt was to 
a cellular telephone services company. Applicant denied owing this debt. The debt is 
listed on all the credit reports in evidence except the September 16, 2008 report. The 
credit resolution company reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting 
resolution.”15 
 
 Applicant denied owing the three medical debts totaling $333, as alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.r through 1.t. He stated they were medical debts incurred by his ex-wife. The 
names of the medical providers are not included in the credit reports. Only one debt, for 
$84, is listed on the most recent credit report. He denied any knowledge of the $50 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u. The credit resolution company reported that debt as “[c]urrently in 
dispute; awaiting resolution.”16 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.v alleges a $15,295 debt for the deficiency owed on a car loan after 
Applicant’s car was voluntarily repossessed. Applicant stated that he attempted to start 
an allotment to make the monthly payments on the loan while he was deployed, but the 
allotment was never started. His brother was supposed to make the payments, but he 
did not. Applicant and the creditor agreed to settle the debt for $7,690. The settlement 
called for Applicant to make two payments of $385 each in January 2009, followed by 
monthly payments of $200. Applicant made the first three payments totaling $970, 
which is what was required by the agreement as of the hearing date.17 
 
 Applicant admitted to owing the $167 delinquent debt to a collection company on 
behalf of a utility company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.w. He testified that he thought he paid 
the debt and that he would obtain a receipt from the creditor. He also admitted that he 
owed the $134 delinquent debt owed to a different utility company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.y. He testified that he paid this debt and would provide a receipt. He did not submit a 
receipt for either debt. Both debts are listed as delinquent on the three most recent 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
14 Tr. at 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE J. 
 
15 Tr. at 44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
16 Tr. at 44-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
17 Tr. at 45-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B, K.  
 
 
6 
 
credit reports. The credit resolution company reported both debts as “in dispute; 
awaiting resolution.”18  
 
 Applicant denied any knowledge of the $510 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x. This debt 
appears on the three most recent credit reports in evidence. The credit resolution 
company reported the debt as “[c]urrently in dispute; awaiting resolution.”19 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to owing the $109 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.z. He denied any knowledge of the debt at the hearing. The name of 
the medical provider is not included in the credit report. The debt is not listed on the 
most recent credit report.”20  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.aa alleges a $286 debt to the U.S. Government. That debt was paid by 
a seizure of Applicant’s federal income tax refund.21   
 
 Applicant submitted two letters from his supervisors and a letter from the pastor 
at his church. He is described as a model employee who has completed all missions 
with professionalism and good judgment; and “an outstanding citizen and asset to his 
family, church and community.” He is recommended for a security clearance.22  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
18 Tr. at 47-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
19 Tr. at 47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, J.  
 
20 Tr. at 48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G.  
 
21 Tr. at 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G.  
 
22 AE D. 
 
7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
8 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes a number of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial 
issues are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. He attributed his financial issues to the 
actions of his brother and cousin while he was deployed with the Army. He also stated 
his ex-wife did not pay her medical bills while he was deployed, which ended up on his 
credit report. These qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not file police reports or anything else to hold his brother 
and cousin responsible for their actions. While it is understandable that one would not 
seek to have his brother arrested, that makes it more difficult to absolve Applicant of 
responsibility for the debts. There is some mitigation for the debts that became 
delinquent because of the actions of Applicant’s brother and cousin. Their actions 
provide minimal mitigation for the debts that were purely Applicant’s responsibility. He 
has worked for his current employer since August 2005, and only recently began 
 
9 
 
addressing his delinquent debts. Applicant did not act responsibly regarding his 
finances for a long period of time. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant received some credit counseling from the credit resolution company. 
He paid several of his smaller debts and started payments on a large debt. However, he 
still has debts to be resolved. The payments appear to be more of a reaction to the 
impact on his security clearance, rather than a sincere acceptance of his financial 
responsibilities. There have not been sufficient voluntary payments for Applicant to 
receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as a good-faith effort to repay his overdue 
creditors. I am also unable to find clear indications that his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are partially applicable. 
 
 The credit resolution company attempted to remove derogatory/inaccurate items 
from Applicant’s credit report. The company’s purpose is to cleanse his credit report, 
even if he is responsible for the item. The company has disputed items that Applicant 
clearly stated were his responsibility. Several of the debts have been deleted from his 
credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 30 
years old. He served in the Army for eight years. He deployed to Iraq, Kuwait, and 
Afghanistan with the Army and with his current employer. He is regarded as a model 
employee. However, I continue to have concerns about his finances. If Applicant’s 
testimony about his brother, cousin, and ex-wife is accepted as true and if all debts that 
have been disputed are disregarded, Applicant is still left with a large amount of 
 
10 
 
delinquent debts. He has worked for his current employer since 2005, and only recently 
began addressing his delinquent debts. His payments are a good start, but are 
insufficient at this time to mitigate security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.o:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.p:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q-1.u:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.v-1.w:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.x:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.y-1.z:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.aa:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
