1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-06742
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on March 5,
2008. On December 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR and he requested a hearing before
an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on March 12, 2009. DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on March 18, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled
on April 7, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE.) 1-10, which were received
without objection. Applicant testified in his own behalf. He submitted Exhibits (AE) A-L
which were admitted into the record without objection. I held the record open until April
2
14, 2009 for any additional documents that Applicant wished to submit. Applicant
submitted one document, which was marked as AE M and entered into the record
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 14, 2009.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 12, 2009, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h of the SOR. He denied allegations ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f,
and 1.g because these debts were either paid or duplicates of other allegations. He
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After he graduated
from high school, he received an associate of arts degree in June 1997. He obtained a
bachelor of arts degree in June 2000. He attended college on a part-time basis while
working and was awarded his second undergraduate degree (computer science) in
December 2007. He has worked for his current employer since June 2008 (GE 1). He
has not held a security clearance.
In May 2000, Applicant’s wife left her job to take care of her uncle who had a
stroke. This created a financial hardship. Applicant’s teaching salary was under
$30,000. Applicant taught high school English until 2001. He worked as a carpenter
after his teaching position but was again laid off in June 2002. Applicant had always
paid his bills and had no delinquent accounts until 2002.
The SOR alleged eight delinquent debts, including two judgments and credit card
bills. The total amount of delinquent debt was approximately $10,000 (GE 3). Applicant
admitted that the majority of the accounts in the SOR allegations were delinquent
accounts. He has paid or settled all of his accounts except one. He established a
payment plan for one judgment. He also paid several debts in full that are not listed on
the SOR (AE A, E, J and K).
The debt in SOR allegation ¶ 1.a is a 2005 judgment. Applicant settled this
account. Since January 2009, he has made more than three payments of $210 a month.
The balance owed is $4,300 (Tr. 62). Applicant’s plan is to pay this amount in full by
June 2009 through accelerated payments (AE H). 
The debt in SOR allegation ¶ 1.b is a 2004 judgment. This judgment is the same
as the debt in allegations 1.c and 1.g. Applicant settled this debt for $995. He made his
final payment on April 6, 2009. The judgment is satisfied (AE D). 
The debt in SOR allegation ¶ 1.d is a department store credit card account.
Applicant settled the account for $1,043. Applicant has a payment plan and has made
3
one monthly payment of $261 (AE B). He plans to accelerate the payments and pay the
account in full by the end of April 2009 (Tr. 72).
The debt in SOR allegation ¶ 1.e is a charged-off account. Applicant settled this
account for $514.54 (AE C). The account is paid. 
The debt in SOR allegation ¶ 1.f is a collection account that was settled in
January 2009 (AE I). The account is paid.
The debt in SOR allegation ¶ 1.h is a collection account that was settled in
August 2008 (AE F). A final payment of $2,000 was made in March 2009.
Applicant presented documentation that several other accounts listed on his
credit report have been resolved. Applicant settled two debts with Capitol One Bank (AE
A).
Applicant’s current net monthly income is $4,000. His salary has almost doubled
compared to his prior salary. After his monthly expenses, he has $1,530 net monthly
remainder. He has two cars and both are fully paid. He has a budget and a savings
plan. Applicant used his 2008 tax refund to accelerate debt payments as discussed
above (Tr. 82). He has no active credit cards. He is current on all his expenses (Tr. 92).
Applicant’s employer describes him as a good and dependable employee who is
respected by his coworkers and performs his work in a diligent manner. He is a decent
and honorable person. He is recommended for a security clearance (AE M).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
4
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on numerous accounts and
had two judgments. He admits that he did not meet his financial obligations from 2002
5
until the present. His credit reports confirm that he had the delinquent debts. The
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose in approximately 2002. Applicant has paid the majority of his
debts. He has another account in a payment plan. He has been making regular
payments and expects the account to be paid very soon. He has doubled his salary and
used his second degree to enter a field of employment that is lucrative and stable. He
has used this additional income to reduce his debts. He has reduced his delinquent debt
and has no current debt. This potentially mitigating condition applies. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s wife’s role as
a caretaker for her uncle impacted his ability to pay his debts. Applicant was earning a
lower salary when he was teaching. He was unemployed for almost seven months.
Applicant’s financial difficulties began with his unemployment. After he became gainfully
employed, he addressed each debt. He acted in a very responsible manner in
identifying and resolving the debts. I find this mitigating condition applies. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received formal financial counseling.
However, he set up a budget himself and settled or paid his debts. He presented
evidence of financial reform and resolution of debts.  I conclude these mitigating
conditions apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
6
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
Applicant is an intelligent, dependable and trustworthy employee. He provided for
his family despite his unemployment. He had no difficulty with his finances until his
unemployment in 2002. He was conscientious in researching and addressing all his
delinquent debts as soon as he was gainfully employed. He has paid or is in the final
stage of payment with all his delinquent debts. I considered the potentially disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this
case and conclude they are sufficient to overcome the government’s case.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
