 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06880 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On December 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response. He did not state whether 
he wanted a hearing before an administrative judge or the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was scheduled for a hearing, during which 
Applicant specifically stated that he wanted a hearing. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
February 11, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 26, 2009, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on March 18, 2009. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 26, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2008. He attended college for a period but did not 
obtain a degree. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1984 to 1995, and the National 
Guard from 1995 to 1998. He has honorably discharged from the Army and National 
Guard. He was married from 1996 until his divorce in 2002. He married again in 2008. 
He has one adult child and two stepchildren; one stepchild is an adult and the other is a 
minor that lives with Applicant and his wife.1  
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife separated in about January 2002. He was able to 
maintain his bills until February 2002, when he lost his job. He was unemployed for 
about three to four months. When he obtained a job, it was at a salary much lower than 
his previous job. His divorce was final in May 2002. The divorce decree ordered that 
Applicant was responsible for all joint debts. He was able to lower the monthly 
payments on his credit cards, but the institutions that owned his mortgage and car loans 
would not lower their monthly payments. He was unable to maintain the payments on 
his debts and they became delinquent.2   
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2003. His bankruptcy plan 
was confirmed in April 2004. His plan called for him to pay about $640 per month to the 
trustee to be disbursed to his creditors. He maintained the payments until about March 
2007, when he again lost his job. He was unemployed for about six months. The 
bankruptcy was dismissed in July 2007. The trustee’s final report showed that Applicant 
paid the trustee $25,213. Of that amount, $21,175 went to his creditors; $1,750 was 
paid to his bankruptcy attorney; and the trustee received $2,288. Most of the payments 
went to his secured debts. The trustee paid $6,968 to the holder of one car loan, leaving 
a balance due of $6,512. An additional $13,517 was paid to the holder of another car 
loan, leaving a balance due of $13,000. The trustee paid $690 to a creditor on an 
unsecured debt, paying the debt in full.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-26, 45; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-18, 29, 44; GE 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 18, 32-33, 45; GE 1-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f.(3) and 1.f.(4) allege debts of $1,689 and $4,822 to the holder of one 
of the car loans that was included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. The trustee divided the 
loan into the amount that was secured by the value of car and the amount that was 
unsecured because the loan was for greater than the car was worth. The amount of the 
loan was $12,227 when he filed bankruptcy. The trustee paid $5,796 toward the 
principal on this loan and $1,171 in interest, for a total of $6,968. The remaining amount 
of the loan that was secured by the value of the car after the bankruptcy payments was 
$1,689; and $4,822 was the remaining unsecured amount of the loan. The car was 
voluntarily repossessed in about July 2007. There is no indication of what, if anything, 
Applicant owes as a deficiency after the vehicle was sold or auctioned.4  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f.(6) and 1.f.(7) allege debts of $2,998 and $10,002 to the holder of the 
other car loan that was included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. The amount of the loan was 
$25,467 when he filed bankruptcy. The trustee paid $12,514 toward the principal on this 
loan and $1,003 in interest, for a total of $13,517. The remaining amount of the loan that 
was secured by the value of the car after the bankruptcy payments was $2,998; and 
$10,002 was the remaining unsecured amount of the loan. The car was voluntarily 
repossessed in about July or August 2007. Applicant indicated that the creditor reported 
to him that the deficiency owed on the car loan after the car was sold at auction was 
$8,000. He has made no payments on this debt.5   
 
 Applicant’s Chapter 13 plan included three additional unsecured debts for credit 
cards, totaling $16,414. No payments to these three debts were made in the bankruptcy 
plan. Applicant has made no payments on any of the three debts since the bankruptcy 
was dismissed. The three debts are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f.(1), 1.f.(2), and 1.f.(5). The 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are duplicates of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.f.(1) and 1.f.(2).6 
 
 Applicant denied owing the delinquent medical debt of $100 which is alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. The debt is listed on a credit report obtained on June 23, 2008. The name of 
the medical provider is not included in the credit report. Applicant testified that the debt 
was supposed to be covered by his medical insurance from his former employer. He 
indicated that he spoke with the hospital and was told that the medical claim would be 
re-filed with his insurance carrier.7  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege debts of $327 and $257 to a collection company on 
behalf of a cellular telephone services company. The debts are listed on the June 23, 
2008 credit report. Applicant denied owing the debts. He stated that he had a business 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 35-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-6.  
 
5 Tr. at 36-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-6.  
 
6 Tr. at 26-29, 33-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-6.  
 
7 Tr. at 29-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3.  
 
 
4 
 
phone at his previous job. When he left the job, the phone was supposed to be turned 
off. He received a bill from the company and has been disputing it since.8   
 
 Applicant owes the Internal Revenue Service for tax years 2002 and 2006. He 
stated that he made mistakes on the returns for those years which led to him owing 
additional taxes. He has been paying $200 per month to the IRS since about February 
2008. He reported the balance of the debt in August 2008 as $4,761. The IRS withheld 
$1,104 from his income tax refund in February or early March 2009. The IRS reported 
on March 4, 2009, after the $1,104 was withheld, that Applicant owed $2,401 for the two 
tax years.9  
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in February 2008. His 
finances and bankruptcy were discussed. He told the investigator that he had not 
received any demand letters from the creditors after the bankruptcy was dismissed. He 
stated that he was waiting for the creditors to call and he would then make payment 
arrangements. He also discussed the possibility that the Chapter 13 could be reinstated. 
Applicant’s current plan is to pay the IRS first because the IRS has levied penalties and 
interest, and seized his income tax refunds. He will then begin addressing his remaining 
delinquent debts. He has not received financial counseling.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 30-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4.  
 
9 Tr. at 19-20, 41, 45-47; GE 4; AE A, B. The IRS debts were not alleged as a basis for the denial 
of Applicant’s security clearance in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification purposes. The debts 
and Applicant’s payment of the debts will be used in assessing Applicant’s total financial picture; in the 
application of mitigating conditions; and in evaluating the “whole person.” 
10 Tr. at 19-20, 45; GE 3, 4.  
 
 
5 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes a number of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial 
issues are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. His financial problems are directly 
attributable to a separation, divorce, and two periods of unemployment. These qualify 
as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant acted 
responsibly for a period by filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2003, and maintaining the 
plan’s payments for several years. He was unable to continue making the payments 
because of his second period of unemployment, and the bankruptcy was dismissed. 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since March 2008. He has not made any 
payments on the debts included in the bankruptcy since it was dismissed. He has been 
paying his IRS debt first because his tax debts are incurring interest and penalties, and 
the IRS withholds his income tax refunds. Applicant is acting somewhat responsibly by 
paying his IRS debt. However, the IRS has much stronger enforcement mechanisms 
than the other creditors. I am unable to conclude that the IRS payments are a sincere 
 
7 
 
acceptance of all his financial responsibilities, rather than a concession that the tax 
debts will not go away and will ultimately have to be paid. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. I further find that his IRS payments constitute a good-faith effort to repay the 
IRS debts, but are insufficient for Applicant to receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as 
a good-faith effort to repay all his overdue creditors. 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. I am unable to find clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e, and 
submitted evidence through his testimony of his actions to resolve those debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) is applicable to those debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 46 
years old. He served in the Army for eleven years and the National Guard for another 
three years, and was honorably discharged from both. He separated, divorced, and lost 
his job all within a short period in 2002. He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy and maintained 
the payments for several years until he again lost his job and the bankruptcy was 
dismissed. He paid the trustee $25,213 during the payment plan. Most of that amount 
went to pay his two car loans, his bankruptcy attorney, and the trustee. Only $690 was 
paid to creditors holding unsecured debts. As such, when the bankruptcy was 
dismissed, Applicant still owed $16,414 on three unsecured credit card debts, and 
$19,512 on the two car loans. Both cars were involuntarily repossessed, leaving a 
 
8 
 
deficiency of about $8,000 on one car loan. The deficiency amount, if any, on the 
second car loan is unknown. Applicant has not made any payments on the debts in his 
bankruptcy plan since it was dismissed. He also owes the IRS for tax years 2002 and 
2006. He has been making $200 payments and the IRS has withheld his income tax 
refunds, but he still owes $2,401. Applicant’s payments to the IRS are a good start on 
addressing his delinquent debts, but are insufficient at this time to mitigate security 
concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.(1):  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.(2):  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.(3):  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.(4):  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.(5):  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.(6):  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.(7):  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
