DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXX, Xxxxx Sxxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 08-04304
SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 2 December 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline B.  Applicant answered the SOR 5 December 2008, and requested a hearing.1
DOHA assigned the case to me 12 February 2009, and I convened a hearing 25 March
2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 2 April 2009.
 
W hich he denied for technical reasons. He has three half-sisters and one half-brother, not two and two as2
alleged. He has traveled to Nigeria several times, but not three times in 2007 as alleged.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for SOR 1.d. and 1.f.  He is a 47-2
year-old senior software engineer employed by a defense contractor since Spring 2008.
He has not previously held a clearance, except for an interim clearance he held before
this action was brought. 
Applicant was born in Nigeria in May 1961. He was raised there and educated
there through high school. He immigrated to the U.S. in April 1980 to go to college,
having obtained an education visa. He eventually obtained his undergraduate degree in
computer science in May 1988, and is currently working on his master’s degree in
computer security. Along the way, he was able to covert his education visa into a work
visa. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 1999. He continued to maintain
his Nigerian passport after his naturalization, but surrendered it to his company’s facility
security officer (FSO) when he became aware of the requirement to do so (G.E. 5). He
obtained his U.S. passport in March 2000.
In June 1991, Applicant married a native-born U.S. citizen. They have three
children, all born in the U.S. Applicant and his wife own three properties in the U.S. The
house he lives in (for the last 13 years) is valued at $175,000. His two investment
properties are worth $400,000. His current salary is $102,000. His savings and
retirement accounts in the U.S. total $40,000.
Applicant’s mother, four sisters, one half-brother, and two half-sisters are all
resident citizens of Nigeria. They live in a small town in the Niger river delta. A third half-
sister, a chemical engineer, lives in the U.S. and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His 75-
year-old mother is a retired school teacher, whom Applicant has sponsored for
immigration to the U.S. (A.E. B, C). Applicant has twin sisters who are both
pharmacists. Another owns a boutique. The last sister is a doctor who is married to a
doctor. His half-brother attends a trade school. One half-sister is a cashier for a local
college, the second is a pharmaceutical distributor. None of them has any connection to
the Nigerian government.
Applicant has returned to Nigeria several times for vacation and family
funerals/memorials. He traveled there in 2001, 2002, 2005 (for his father’s memorial
service), and twice in 2007 (once for a family funeral). He does not expect to return to
Nigeria unless his mother dies before she can immigrate to the U.S. As her only son, he
is culturally obligated to hold her funeral. To that end, he has a Nigerian bank account
containing $2,000.
Applicant fully disclosed his foreign connections on his May 2007 and July 2007
clearance applications (G.E. 1, 2) and fully discussed them during a December 2007
subject interview (G.E. 6). During his interview, he stated his willingness to renounce his
3
Nigerian citizenship. When he became aware of the security concerns raised by his
possession and use of a Nigerian passport, he surrendered his passport to his facility
security officer (FSO) in November 2008 (G.E. 5).
Applicant’s supervisor—who hired him—extols his work performance and his
handling of classified and company sensitive information, and recommends him for his
clearance (A.E. A). Applicant has received company-sponsored security briefings.
Nigeria—a part of the British Empire first as a sphere of British influence in 1885,
then as a colony and protectorate in 1914—was granted independence from the United
Kingdom in October 1960. Since independence, the government has experienced
multiple periods of political unrest, including military takeovers of the government.
However, the military has generally ceded power back to civilian government, most
recently in May 1999. Although Nigeria has a poor human rights record, it has been a
staunch supporter of the U.S. global war on terrorism. Furthermore, since independence
Nigerian foreign policy has been characterized by a focus on Africa and adherence to
several fundamental principles: African unity and independence; peaceful settlement of
disputes; nonalignment and nonintentional interference in the internal affairs of other
nations; and regional economic cooperation and development. Nigeria is the largest
U.S. trading partner in sub-Saharan Africa, and the U.S. is second only to the United
Kingdom in trade with Nigeria. The U.S. is the largest foreign investor in Nigeria. Nigeria
is not a known collector of U.S. intelligence or sensitive economic information. Nigeria is
not known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information. The U.S. Department
of State characterizes the foreign relations between the U.S. and Nigeria as excellent. 
Nevertheless, violent crime, committed by ordinary criminals as well as by
persons in police and military uniforms, can occur throughout the country. Kidnaping for
ransom of persons associated with the petroleum section, including U.S. citizens,
remains common in the Niger Delta region. A travel warning issued in January 2007
warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to Nigeria and of further deterioration of the
security situation in the Niger Delta region. The travel warning also notes that al Qaida
leadership has expressed an interest in overthrowing the Nigeria government.
Although the civilian government since 1999 was characterized by political unrest
and corruption, an opposition candidate was elected in May 2007 and power transferred
peacefully. The new government has been working on necessary electoral and other
reforms.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.4
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).5
4
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline B
(Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does
so, it establishes a prima facie case against access to classified information. Applicant
must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a
right to a security clearance, the Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information4
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.5
In this case, the argument for disqualification under Guideline B is not
persuasive. Considering first the foreign country involved, Nigeria and the U.S. enjoy
5
excellent foreign relations. However, while Nigeria focuses its foreign policy largely in
the region, it is actively cooperating with the U.S. in ending global terrorism. Nigeria is
not known to target protected U.S. information, nor is it known to target U.S. citizens to
obtain protected information. Further, in this case it is not clear what further claim
Nigeria might have on Applicant. He has both expressed a willingness to renounce his
Nigerian citizenship, and has surrendered his passport to his FSO. The risk that Nigeria
might seek protected information from Applicant is low, if not non-existent.
Considering Applicant’s situation in relation to the Nigerian government, the
government produced no evidence that there was any risk, much less a heightened risk,
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of
Applicant’s family contacts in Nigeria. Applicant’s travel to Nigeria has no independent
security significance given that Nigeria is not known to be targeting U.S. citizens for
information. Further, the security significance of travel under most circumstances is
demonstrating an applicant’s affection for family members, which his trips corroborate
and which Applicant does not dispute. But none of his family members is connected to
the Nigerian government nor otherwise situated to be exploited for information
gathering. There is nothing in the circumstances of their being in Nigeria, or in
Applicant’s contacts with them, to heighten the risk that he could be impelled to provide
protected information to Nigeria. 
Applicant’s ties to the U.S. are overwhelming. He has resided here for 29 years,
and been a citizen for almost ten. His wife and children are U.S. born citizens. His
financial interests in the U.S.—nearly $600,000 in real estate, $40,000 in savings, and
$102,000 annual salary—dwarf the $2,000 in a Nigerian bank earmarked for his
mother’s funeral in the event she dies before he is able to bring her to the U.S. I resolve
Guideline B for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
