  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04060 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in India and came to the U.S. as a student in 1985. In 2001, 
both Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens. Applicant’s parents are 
naturalized U.S. citizens who live part of the year in India. His older brother lives in 
California and his younger brother lives in India. Both are naturalized U.S. citizens. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of India. Applicant has rebutted or 
mitigated the government’s security concerns under foreign influence. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
 
 
1
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 14, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
foreign influence. 
  
 On October 30, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On December 15, 2008, I was assigned the case. On January 5, 2009, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on January 22, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through E, 
which were admitted into evidence. The record was held open to allow Applicant to 
submit additional information. On January 27, 2009, additional material was submitted. 
Department Counsel having no objection to the material, it was admitted into the record 
as Ex. F. On February 3, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.c of the 
SOR. He admitted the remaining factual allegations of the SOR, with explanations. 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old software engineer (Tr. 52) who has worked for a 
defense contractor since July 2007, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. 
Coworkers state Applicant is extremely personable, dependable, open and honest. 
Applicant is very hard working. (Ex. A)  
 
 Applicant was born in India. In 1985, he came to the U.S. as a student. He 
attended a university college of engineering from 1985 to 1991. He obtained a Master of 
Science degree in electrical engineering and computer science. In 1992, he met his wife 
while on vacation in India and they married the same year. (Tr. 24) His wife is a quality 
control chemist for a pharmaceutical company who has a Master’s degree in chemistry. 
(Tr. 24) In November 2001, both he and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens. In 
December 2001, Applicant obtained a U.S. passport. (Ex. C) In 2004, his Indian 
passport expired. 
 
 Applicant’s parents are naturalized U.S. citizens who live the majority of the year 
in India. His father was a partner in a firm that made high voltage equipment. (Tr. 27) In 
1987, he retired from the company. Applicant’s mother is a housewife. None of his 
relatives or in-laws work for or have worked for the Indian government or any other 
foreign government. Applicant previously had weekly contact with them, but now his 
contact is once a month. (Tr. 27) In 1996, his parents obtained their green card, 
permanent resident status. In 2003, they obtained their U.S. citizenship. 
 
 Applicant’s younger brother was born in India, came to the U.S. in 1989, is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, and currently works in India as a business analyst. His brother 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
and his sister-in-law worked for a U.S. company in California before they accepted a 
company transfer to India. They currently work for the same company in India. Their 
children were born in the U.S. (Tr. 33) They own a house in California and it is their 
intention to return to the U.S. (Tr. 31)  
 
 Applicant’s older brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen who owns a software 
business in California. His older brother has two children born in the U.S. (Tr. 35) 
Applicant talks with his brother weekly. His older brother was the first of the family to 
come to the U.S. Applicant has aunts and uncles in India that he contacts less than 
once a year. (Tr. 50)  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law, a housewife, is a citizen and resident of India who has 
visited Applicant and his wife in the U.S. four times. Applicant’s father-in-law was a 
textile engineer before his death in 1995. (Tr. 41, 54) Applicant’s wife calls her mother 
once a week. (Tr. 47) Applicant’s wife has one brother. Applicant’s mother-in-law had 
been living with his wife’s brother prior to his move to the U.S. (Tr. 40) In 2007, 
Applicant’s wife’s brother, a business analyst, and Applicant’s sister-in-law came to the 
U.S. Applicant talks to his brother-in-law once every two weeks. (Tr. 40) Applicant’s 
sister-in-law is a U.S. citizen. They are employed in the U.S. Their son,  
Applicant’s wife’s nephew, is an Indian citizen.  
 Applicant traveled to India in January 2001, January 2005, and December 
2006— January 2007. When he traveled to India, he visited relatives and in-laws, in 
India. His travel to India was facilitated by an Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) card 
he obtained in 2006. (Ex. D) The Constitution of India does not allow holding Indian 
citizenship and citizenship of a foreign country simultaneously. (Ex. 3) The OCI serves 
as a lifetime visa to visit India. The card allows the holder to enter India at anytime and 
stay in India as long as the person desires. With the card, the holder is not required to 
obtain a visa prior to traveling to India. (Ex. 2) Applicant submitted an Indian Form XXII 
renunciation of his overseas citizenship of India. (Ex. E) Applicant’s OCI card has been 
cancelled. (Ex. F)  
 In 2005 and 2007, Applicant visited his wife’s schoolmate and her husband, 
citizens of India, living in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). His wife’s friend is a 
housewife and his wife’s friend’s husband is a project manager for an engineering 
company. (Tr. 47, 48, Ex. 2) Applicant and his wife would visit her wife’s friend because 
the aircraft stopped in the UAE on its return trip to the U.S. Now there are direct flights 
from India to the U.S. and Applicant and his wife no longer stop in the UAE. Applicant’s 
wife contacts her friend in the UAE once every six months. (Tr. 49)  
 
 In 1998, ten years ago, Applicant purchased a home in the U.S. (Tr. 42) His 
home has a fair market value of $300,000 and Applicant has equity of $150,000. (Tr. 43, 
Ex. F) Applicant has $150,000 in his 401(k) retirement plan. He has no property or 
financial interest in India or any foreign country. (Ex. 2) Applicant has no financial 
obligations to any of his relatives. (Tr. 29, Ex. 2)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India, along with 13 attachments. The facts administratively 
noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to 
reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
India 
 
I have taken administrative notice that India is not hostile to the U.S. nor are its 
interests inimical to the United States. The U.S. and India enjoy good relations. The 
United States is India's largest trading partner. India=s size, population, and strategic 
location give it a prominent voice in international affairs, and its growing industrial base, 
military strength, and scientific and technical capacity on issues from trade to 
environmental protection.  
 
The U.S. recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to 
strengthen its relationship with India. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including India’s increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
According to its constitution, India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic 
republic. It is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament 
and a population of approximately 1.1 billion people.  
 
Although the Indian government generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens, there remained numerous serious problems and significant human rights 
abuses. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of persons in 
custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability permeated the 
government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human rights 
violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks have been committed in recent 
years by separatist and terrorist groups. 
 
 There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive 
U.S. technology by foreign private entities does not slow its flow to foreign governments 
or its use in military applications. 
 
 The U.S. views India as a growing world power with which it shares common 
strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries and they are 
 
 
 
4
expected to continue to address differences and shape a dynamic and collaborative 
future. The U.S. and India are seeking to elevate the strategic partnership further to 
include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense cooperation, education, and joint 
democracy promotion. 
 
The United States government encourages small and medium size companies to 
expand their business opportunities in India. Many United States based companies, 
including large computer service and software development companies, have subsidiary 
companies and do business in India. 
 
While there is a threat of terrorism in India, as well as in most areas of the world, 
the area of India where Applicant=s family resides is not listed as an area of safety or 
security concern, or of instability because of terrorism.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
 
 
 
5
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
  
AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes thee conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
                                                          
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
6
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant has frequent contact with his parents and younger brother, who are 
U.S. naturalized citizens living in India. Applicant’s older brother is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen living in California. His wife has weekly contact with her mother. Applicant has 
less frequent contacts with his aunts, uncles, mother-in-law, and other in-laws. 
However, these relationships with family members create a heightened risk of foreign 
pressure or exploitation because entities in India have sought U. S. intelligence or 
proprietary information. His connections to his family also create a potential conflict of 
interest because the relationship with his brother and parents are sufficiently close in 
nature and could raise a security concern over his desire to help his family.  
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation. Three of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) have some application to Applicant’s relationships with his 
parents, brother, his in-laws, and his wife’s friend. None of those relatives are in 
positions connected with the Indian government or engaged in activities that would likely 
cause Applicant to be exploited or placed in a position of having to choose between 
them and the United States. Applicant’s contact with his parents is once a month, but it 
is not clear that the contacts are so casual that they could not create any risk of foreign 
influence. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) applies to his wife’s friend from school and her husband who live in the 
UAE. Applicant has visited them twice with the last visit in 2007. With a change in air 
plane schedules, Applicant’s travel to and from India no longer involves a stop in the 
UAE. Therefore, Applicant’s contact with his wife’s friend will become even less 
frequent.  
 
 
 
7
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the United States, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of U.S. interests. He has lived in the United States since 1985 when he 
arrived to attend university. After earning his degree and advanced degree, he began 
working here. In 2001, he became a U.S. citizen as did his wife. Both of his children 
were born in the U.S. In contrast, his ties to India have become minimal over the years. 
He has substantial U.S. property. He renounced his Indian citizenship and does not 
have any financial or property interests there. He has infrequent communication with his 
aunt and uncles, living there. Since 2001, he visited India three times for recreational 
purposes, the last visit occurring two years ago.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each 
guideline, the adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all 
available, reliable information about the applicant, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision. The essence of scrutinizing all appropriate 
variables in a case is referred to as the “whole person” analysis. Under the whole 
person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all the 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 A Guideline B decision concerning India must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in that country, as well as the dangers existing in India.3 While 
there is no evidence India is a known collector of U.S. intelligence and sensitive 
economic information, there have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India. Foreign government 
entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have capitalized on 
private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive U.S. 
technology by foreign private entities does to slow it flow to foreign governments or its 
use in military applications.  
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
 
 
8
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; 
and many other [factors] raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 
at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards granting 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
 It has been two years since Applicant traveled to India. His ties to his parents, 
brother, and in-laws are limited to telephone calls for family news. His communications 
establish ties of affection to his Indian family members. There is some possibility that 
Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interest of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the United 
States, especially because India has a significant lawless element, who may attempt to 
harm Applicant’s relatives to gain some kind of advantage over Applicant.  
 
Applicant is a mature person. He has lived in the United States for more than 23 
years, and has been a naturalized citizen for the past eight. Applicant’s spouse has 
been living in the United States since 1992 and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His two 
children were born in the United States. He earned a degree and an advanced degree 
from a U.S. institution. He is a successful member of his business community, providing 
services to the U.S. government. His ties to the United States are much stronger than 
his ties to his relatives living in India. His parents and brothers are all U.S. citizens.  
 
There is no evidence Applicant has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously. 
His Indian citizenship was renounced by taking his U.S. oath of citizenship. India does 
not recognize dual citizenship. Additionally, Applicant’s OCI card has been cancelled. 
There is not any derogatory information about him in the record. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.4 Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:   For Applicant 
                                                          
4 I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
 
 
 
 
9
 
 
 
10
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Applicant’s security clearance is granted.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
