 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-07146 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric M. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference), based on Applicant’s possession of a Polish passport. Before the hearing, 
he surrendered his passport to his security officer. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 27, 2008. On 
January 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline C. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 3, 2009; answered it in an undated 
document, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on February 6, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 3, 
2009; and the case was assigned to me on March 11, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 13, 2009, scheduling the hearing for April 2, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit 
(AX) A, which was admitted without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of 
the hearing on April 2, 2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 15, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old engineering assistant for a federal contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since September 2007. He has never held a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant was born in Poland, and he came to the U.S. with his parents and 
brother in July 1994 (Tr. 19). He finished high school and took some college courses in 
the U.S. (Tr. 20). He became a U.S. citizen in June 2004. His mother became a U.S. 
citizen in December 2004, and his father became a U.S. citizen in May 2005. His only 
sibling, a brother, is a Polish citizen. His parents and his brother all live with him (Tr. 
27). 
 
 Applicant’s father was working in the U.S. until he was permanently disabled by a 
job-related injury (Tr. 25). His mother and brother are both employed in the U.S. (Tr. 25; 
GX 2 at 3). 
 
 Applicant was issued a Polish passport in June 2002, with an expiration date in 
June 2012. Applicant has never used his Polish passport, and he has no plans to visit 
Poland or live there (Tr. 20, 22, 28).  
 
Applicant’s parents own a home in Poland. In May 2008, he told a security 
investigator he kept his Polish passport because, if he inherited his parent’s property, he 
would be subjected to higher taxes and expenses as a non-citizen (GX 2 at 3). In his 
response to DOHA interrogatories on September 16, 2008, he stated he intended to 
keep his Polish passport because it is the only form of identification that identifies him 
as a Polish citizen, and his Polish passport would “save [him] a lot of time and money” if 
he inherited his parents’ property (GX 2 at 2).  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified his concern about avoiding taxes arose from 
conversations with his parents, but had not researched the applicable Polish law (Tr. 
27-28). Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel presented any evidence on Polish 
law. Applicant admitted at the hearing that he did not know what would happen to the 
 
3 
 
 
property, because his parents had been living in the U.S. for 15 years, and it is possible 
they might sell it (Tr. 23). 
 
 Applicant testified he did not fully understand the implications of his Polish 
passport when he was interviewed by the security investigator and when he answered 
the DOHA interrogatories. Once he found out that the passport raised security concerns 
and that he could resolve them easily by surrendering his passport, he surrendered his 
Polish passport to his facility security officer (FSO), who will retain it until it expires or 
Applicant no longer needs a security clearance (Tr. 26; AX A). 
 
 Applicant testified he is willing to renounce his Polish citizenship (Tr. 23). When 
he surrendered his Polish passport, he inquired about the procedure for renouncing his 
Polish citizenship. He was informed that it costs “thousands of dollars,” takes more than 
a year, and must be approved personally by the President of Poland. He concluded he 
is financially unable to pursue that option at this time (Tr. 18).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
 
4 
 
 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant exercises dual citizenship with Poland and the U.S. 
(¶ 1.a); he possessed a Polish passport issued on June 13, 2002, that will expire on 
June 13, 2012 (¶ 1.b); and he will inherit property in Poland from his parents and his 
Polish passport will save him time and money (¶ 1.c). The concern under this guideline 
is set out in AG ¶ 9 as follows: “When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States.” A disqualifying condition may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen,” including but not limited 
to “possession of a current foreign passport.” AG ¶ 10(a)(1). A disqualifying condition 
also may arise from “using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country.” AG ¶ 10(a)(5). 
  
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse security 
clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 
2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual national, but 
rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country through actions.”  
ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 15, 1999). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is not limited to countries hostile to the 
U.S. “Under the facts of a given case, an applicant’s preference, explicit or implied, 
even for a nation with which the U.S. has enjoyed long and peaceful relations, might 
pose a challenge to U.S. interests.” ADP Case No. 07-14939 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 
2009). 
 
 Applicant’s possession of an active Polish passport after becoming a U.S. citizen 
raises AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Department Counsel argued that AG ¶ 10(a)(5) is also raised, but 
the evidence supporting that argument is meager. Applicant has only an expectation of 
inheriting property; he has inherited nothing. He admitted he does not know in what 
form he will receive his inheritance. If the property is sold and the proceeds deposited in 
a U.S. institution or reinvested in the U.S., his Polish citizenship and passport will be 
irrelevant. Finally, there is no reliable evidence showing that his inheritance would be 
affected if he renounced his citizenship, because neither side presented any evidence 
of the applicable Polish law. The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c is based solely on Applicant’s 
answers in response to investigators’ questions about his motivation for keeping his 
Polish citizenship and passport.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s answers to the investigators indicate he was 
initially reluctant to renounce his citizenship because he was concerned that it might 
affect his inheritance. AG ¶ 10(a)(5) focuses on an applicant’s mindset, not the 
accuracy of his or her understanding of the situation. Recognizing that security 
determinations should err on the side of denying a clearance, I conclude that Applicant’s 
subjective concern for his possible inheritance of property in Poland is sufficient to raise 
AG ¶ 10(a)(5). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and (5), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” AG ¶ 
11(a).  Security concerns also may be mitigated by if “the individual has expressed a 
willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” AG ¶ 11(b). Finally, security concerns based 
on possession or use of a foreign passport may be mitigated if “the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” AG 
¶ 11(e).  All of these mitigating conditions are established.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline C in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant came to the U.S. with his family as a teenager, and has lived all his 
adult life in the U.S. He was candid and sincere at the hearing. When faced with a 
choice between his security clearance and the possibility that a future inheritance might 
be more complicated and expensive, he resolved the conflict in favor of his security 
clearance. He has never used his Polish passport, and he has no interest in returning to 
Poland. All of his immediate family lives with him in the U.S. His career aspirations are 
oriented on the U.S. The evidence clearly shows he prefers the U.S. over Poland. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline C, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign preference. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
