  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07669 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed approximately $18,000 on five past due accounts. All of the 
obligations have been paid. Applicant has successfully mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on December 10, 2008, detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, based on a history of financial 
problems as evicenced by delinquent debts. 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
  
 On December 18, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On February 9, 2009, I was assigned the case. On February 19, 2009, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on March 18, 2009. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were admitted into 
evidence. On March 31, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e and 
admitted the remaining factual allegations of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the 
SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old plastic fabricator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since February 2008, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 All of the debts in question listed in the SOR are for credit cards acquired in 1999 
and 2000. (Tr. 26) In 1999, Applicant graduated from high school. Applicant worked two 
jobs and attended college at night. (Tr. 25) At age 18 and 19, while in college, Applicant 
received a number of unsolicited credit cards, which he used. The credit cards had very 
high interest rates, some as high as 28%. (Tr. 25) By 2003, Applicant was no longer 
able to pay his credit card bills. (Ex. 3)  
 
 Applicant owed one credit card company (SOR ¶ 1.a) $3,934. The debt has been 
paid and settled in full. (Ex. C, F) He owed $2,200 on a bank credit card (SOR ¶ 1.b), 
which has been settled in full. (Ex. D) The $203 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d relates to a 
company which is out of business. Applicant provided proof that he sent two checks to 
the collection agency to pay this debt. 9Ex. F) 
 
 Applicant had two credit cards with the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.c ($5,712), 
which became delinquent in 2004. The accounts were transferred to another credit card 
and Applicant was contacted by a collection agency about this debt. (Ex. 3) Applicant’s 
September 2008 credit bureau report (CBR) indicates the account was transferred or 
sold and the account charged off. (Ex. 4, p 2) Applicant’s April 2008 CBR indicates one 
of the accounts was with a collection agency and the other account was “purchased by 
another lender.” (Ex. 5, p 15, 16)  
 
 The debt for these two accounts was transferred to creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.d 
($6,455). These debts have been settled in full. (Ex. A, F) The collection firm’s February 
2009 letter indicates the balance was $6,455 (the amount listed in SOR ¶ 1.e) and 
references an account number, which is listed in the April 2008 CBR as belonging to the 
creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. The debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.c and SOR ¶ 1.e are the same 
debt.  
 
 
 
 
3
 Applicant’s wife has a job working in a daycare center. (Tr. 31) His first child was 
born in September 2008. Due to the importance to himself and his family that he pay his 
obligations, Applicant sold his four wheeler, hunting gear, and guns to raise the funds 
necessary to pay his past due obligations. (Tr. 28) Applicant provided proof of payment 
for two additional debts not listed as debts of concern in the SOR. (Ex. C, E) Applicant’s 
monthly net income is $4,335. His monthly expenses are $2,212, which leaves his 
monthly disposable income at $1,068. If granted a clearance, his salary would increase 
by $20,000 annually. (Tr. 30)  His financial obligations are being paid in a timely 
manner.  He is not being contacted by creditors.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
 
4
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report, SOR 
response, his response to interrogatories, and his testimony. Throughout this process, 
he had admitted responsibility for his debts. At age 18 or 19 Applicant obtained credit 
cards and incurred debts. The five debts listed in the SOR totaled more than $18,000. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
   
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
 
 
5
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by his 
obtaining credit cards when he was 18 or 19 years old and lacked knowledge of 
properly handling credit. His family circumstances have changed. He is married and 
recently become a father. It is unlikely he will again incur financial problems due to 
credit cards. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply because his financial problems were not beyond his 
control. Although a 28% interest rate on the creditor cards greatly contributed to his 
inability to repay his debt. The interest rate was a factor beyond his control.  
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), Applicant has paid all of his debts. There is a 
clear indication that his financial problems are resolved. He entered into a good-faith 
effort and has repaid his debts. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) apply. AG & 20(e) does not 
apply because Applicant did not dispute his debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
 
6
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts were incurred when 
Applicant was young and not financially savvy. He obtained the credit cards when he 
was 18 or 19 years old. He is now 28. His inability to repay the debts was caused by the 
very high interest rate the credit card companies charged. Understanding the 
seriousness of maintaining good credit and paying his past due obligations, Applicant 
chose to sell his hunting equipment and guns to pay his debts. So doing indicates 
Applicant understands how important it is to maintain good credit. His debts now having 
been paid, it is unlikely he will incur additional obligations that would become past due. 
In September 2008, he became a father, which has greatly impacted on his view of life 
and properly maintaining his credit.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.e:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
  
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
