1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------, ------- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02705
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant accumulated multiple delinquent debts over the past six years for a
variety of reasons. After they were placed for collection, and when the collection
agencies would not negotiate reduced settlement amounts, Applicant decided not to pay
them and just wait until they dropped off his credit report. He entered a debt
consolidation plan the day before his hearing, with an initial $485 payment toward the
$14,136 in consolidated debt. He has not yet established a meaningful track record of
resolving his delinquent debt. Based upon a thorough review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on April 13, 2007. On October 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
2
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 17, 2008. He answered
the SOR in writing on November 24, 2008, and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 5,
2009, and DOHA assigned the case to me on the following day.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 4, 2009, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on February 24, 2009. Department Counsel offered Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on
his own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, which were also
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March
4, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where he has worked
for four years as a logistics specialist. He was married from 1984 to 1989, and married
his current wife later in 1989. He has five children, the youngest of whom is 18 and the
only one still living with Applicant. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted to 10 of the 21
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.u. On May 28, 2008, Applicant responded to DOHA
Interrogatories under oath, and affirmed the accuracy of the contents of the report of his
interview, conducted by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on July
23, 2007. All of Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in the following findings. 
Applicant enlisted in the Air Force in March 1982 and served on active duty until
October 1994. Since then he has served in the Active Reserves. He has held a security
clearance since 1982, without any adverse security incidents. In 1990, largely as a
result of his divorce, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief and his debts were
discharged. His present delinquent debt started to accrue in 2002. Applicant’s family
was then living in a different state from where he was working, and he only came home
on weekends. His wife did not pay some of their bills, and he discovered this when
some collection notices started arriving. (GE 1; Tr. at 56-60, 66-72.)
Applicant sought advice from a financial counselor, who advised him that once
the debts had gone into collection status, the damage to his credit score was already
done and repaying them would not improve that score. He tried unsuccessfully to
negotiate reductions in the interest and fees being claimed by the debt collectors. He
told the OPM investigator that he decided not to pay the debts since the creditors and
collection agencies would not work with him, and he would just wait seven years for
them to drop off his credit bureau reports (CBRs). The six delinquencies from 2002 that
remain unpaid are listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.r, totaling $6,026. (GE 2
at 3; GE 3-7 (CBRs); Tr. at 24-29, 36, 41, 48, 71-73.) 
Applicant demonstrated that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.q, 1.s, and 1.t, are
duplicate CBR listings of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.o, and 1.n, respectively. He
3
further demonstrated that he successfully disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, and
1.l, which have been removed from his 2009 CBRs. Finally, he proved that he settled
and paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, and 1.m, for reduced amounts in November
2003, and May 2007, respectively. (AE B; AE C; AE D; AE F; AE G; GE 5 at 2; Tr. at
24-27, 30-35, 37-38, 44-46, 49.)
Although Applicant testified that he has been paying all his debts recently, the
CBRs reflect that seven of his outstanding debts became delinquent between 2003 and
2008. These debts, with amounts owed and dates of last activity are alleged in SOR ¶¶
1.a ($266/Apr. 2007), 1.c ($200/Aug. 2007), 1.d ($100/Jun 2007), 1.f ($206/Jan. 2004),
1.g ($189 past due Jan. 2008, total owed $1,490), 1.h ($390 past due Nov. 2005, total
owed $1,392), and 1.k ($511/Aug. 2003). (GE 3-7; Tr. at 38-43, 47, 77-78, 82-83.)
Although he told the OPM investigator that he had no intention of repaying any of
his delinquent debts during his July 2007 interview, he received some additional
counseling from an Air Force legal assistance attorney concerning the risks associated
with that course of action and decided to seek assistance from a credit counseling and
debt consolidation service to resolve his debts. On February 23, 2009, the day before
his hearing, Applicant entered into a debt management plan agreement consolidating
$14,136 in debts, some of which were not previously delinquent but may become so
under the plan’s distribution of payments. The plan includes the 13 SOR-listed
delinquent debts noted above (¶¶ 1.a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, k, n, o, p, and r), with a current
total balance of $10,341. The agreement calls for Applicant to pay $485 to start, and
$460 per month thereafter for 38 months. It also requires him to undergo a financial
education course. Upon completion of the agreement in April 2012, the 26 debts in the
plan will be repaid. (GE 2 at 3, 7, 8; AE A; Tr. at 21-24, 73-74.)  
Applicant and his wife, who recently resumed employment, make sufficient
income to meet these debt management plan payments and their other living expenses
without incurring additional debt. It is their present intention to resolve their outstanding
delinquencies and remain financially responsible in the future. He is pending promotion
to paygrade E-9 in the Air Force Reserve, and his military performance reports reflect
outstanding evaluations, especially since 2002. He was awarded a Meritorious Service
Medal for his performance of reserve duties from March 2002 to June 2003, and was
nominated for Wing Senior NCO of the Quarter in May 2004. Former military
commanders and supervisors wrote him strong letters of recommendation for positions
he was seeking in 2004 and 2007, and his current civilian supervisor provided a strong
endorsement of his work performance and character. (AE H - K; Tr. at 59-66, 74-75.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Applicant’s admissions and the Government evidence raised two of these
potentially disqualifying conditions: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant openly expressed his
unwillingness to satisfy a number of his delinquent debts as recently as his July 2007
OPM interview, and despite earning what he claims to be more than sufficient money to
cover present living expenses, two of his SOR-listed debts became delinquent after that
interview. He successfully disputed two debts formerly listed on his CBRs, and settled
two other debts. However, he still carries substantial delinquent debt that he will not fully
repay until April 2012 under his current plan. Accordingly, Applicant has demonstrated
both present inability and recent unwillingness to satisfy debts, raising concerns under
AG ¶ 19(a). He also has a lengthy history of not meeting financial obligations, starting
with a bankruptcy discharge in 1990. Six debts totaling more than $6,000 became
delinquent in 2002, when Applicant’s wife stopped competently handling their finances.
These debts remain unpaid, and another seven SOR-listed debts totaling over $4,000
became delinquent from 2003 to 2008. His consolidated debt management plan covers
more than $14,000 in present debt, some of which will remain unpaid for the next three
years. This history supports security concerns under AG ¶ 19(c). Applicant’s pattern of
unwillingness and inability to pay his debts, resulting in his lengthy history of not
meeting financial obligations, raises substantial questions about his self-control,
judgment, and willingness to abide by rules and regulations under which people are
expected to fulfill their lawful obligations.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from a
history of unpaid debt and financial irresponsibility. The five potentially pertinent
conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s presently delinquent debts arose over a six-year period and 13 of
those debts listed in the SOR remain delinquent to date. His 1990 bankruptcy was 19
years ago, and largely caused by a divorce that there is no indication might recur.
Applicant established mitigation of concerns about this bankruptcy under AG ¶ 20(a),
but concerns about his more recent delinquent debts and until recently, his refusal to
address them are not mitigated under that provision and cast doubt on his current good
judgment and trustworthiness. Applicant also established mitigation concerning his 1990
bankruptcy under AG ¶ 20(b), since it was divorce-related. However, his post 2002
debts all arose while he was happily married, fully employed, and had no reason not to
act more responsibly toward them. 
Applicant entered a debt management plan on the day before his hearing and
made one $485 payment toward the $14,136 in covered debts. Financial counseling is
also part of this program, thereby beginning to establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c)
and (d). However, in light of his six years of express and conscious refusal to address
most of these debts, and last minute action under imminent threat of losing his security
clearance, the degree to which this effort can be considered in good faith is
questionable. In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the Appeal
Board recently discussed an applicant’s burden of proof under these mitigating factors:
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a)(“Available, reliable information about the person, past
7
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
Applicant did establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) concerning the allegations
in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, and 1.m, by negotiating and paying settlements of the debts involved. He
established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, and 1.l,
which he successfully disputed and caused to be removed from his CBRs. He also
demonstrated that no independent security concerns arise under SOR ¶¶ 1.q, 1.s, and
1.t, since those allegations reflect duplicate listings of the outstanding delinquencies
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.o, and 1.n. 
 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves his recent history of financial irresponsibility that began in 2002 and
continued through 2008. His professional performance in active and reserve Air Force
service and as a defense contractor has been exemplary. The amount of his delinquent
debt is not terribly large compared to his resources, but reflected his conscious choice,
until very recently, to ignore collection efforts and refuse to address the debts in the
absence of concessions by his creditors. A substantial amount of delinquent debt
remains outstanding, despite his having been employed by defense contractors and the
8
Air Force Reserve throughout this period. He very recently entered a debt consolidation
and management program that should resolve his outstanding debts by April 2012 if he
follows through with the plan. Having only made the one initial $485 payment under the
plan to date, it is too early to conclude with any confidence that he will do so in light of
the previous six years of intentional refusal to address them. The potential for coercion
or duress remains unchanged as he has yet to achieve substantial reduction in the
number or amount of these debts. His plan will not achieve such reductions for several
years, during which time security concerns will continue.
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to fully mitigate judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness security concerns arising from his recent unwillingness
and present inability to satisfy his debts, and his history of not meeting financial
obligations. By demonstrating a sufficient period of compliance with, or acceleration of,
his debt management plan, such concerns can be mitigated in the foreseeable future
given the length and quality of his service to the national defense. At present, however,
the record evidence leaves substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
