1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------, ------- ------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02529
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant had some delinquent debts incurred more than three years ago that
she could not afford to repay. All these debts were finally discharged in bankruptcy in
January 2009. She is now solvent, financially responsible, and debt-free. Based upon a
thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access
to classified information is granted. 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on October 5, 2007. On August 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 30, 2008. She
answered the SOR in writing on the same date, and originally requested a decision
without a hearing before an administrative judge. After preliminary discussions with
Department Counsel, she changed her mind and requested a hearing. Department
Counsel then requested a hearing pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.7, to accommodate this
request. (Tr. at 17-20.) Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 19,
2008, and DOHA assigned the case to me on November 21, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 2, 2008, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on January 9, 2009. Department Counsel offered Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on
her own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were also admitted
without objection. I granted Applicant’s and Department Counsel’s joint request to leave
the record open to permit Applicant to obtain and submit additional documents
concerning her bankruptcy. This evidence was submitted and admitted as AE C, without
objection by Department Counsel, on February 12, 2009. DOHA received the transcript
of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where she has
worked for two years as an administrative assistant. She is a single mother of two
teenage children. In her answer to the SOR, she admitted to all of the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, describing 5 delinquent credit card debts totaling $25,954.
Those admissions are incorporated in the following findings. 
Applicant and the father of her children ended their long-term relationship around
2002. She was emotionally hurt and became increasingly unhappy with her previous
line of work in the tourism industry. Through what she describes as weakness and
stupidity, she ran up unpaid maximum totals on the five credit cards in question. She
spent this money on many gift items for her children and other family members, as well
as twice-yearly trips to Las Vegas. At the end of 2006, she left her former job, and was
unemployed until starting her current job in April 2007. She made her last payments
toward each of those credit card debts in late 2006. About this time she also realized
her financial irresponsibility had to end. She incurred no additional delinquent debts
after that point. (GE 2; GE 4; GE 6; Tr. at 28-32.)
Applicant talked to several credit counseling services in order to attempt to repay
her debts, but could not afford the proposed payments. Her family members did not
have excess funds to help her either. Finally, an attorney advised her to file for Chapter
7 bankruptcy protection and start over. She found this to be her only realistic option, and
filed the bankruptcy papers on October 23, 2008. She listed all of the SOR-listed debts
and a $1,629 debt to a computer company as unsecured, non-priority dischargeable
debts. She also completed the required credit counseling and debtor education course
on personal financial management. On January 26, 2009, the bankruptcy court issued a
final order discharging her debts. (GE 2; AE A through C; Tr. at 32-33.)
3
Applicant and her children currently live with her mother, where she pays
household utility costs in lieu of rent. She does not own a car, and rides to work with her
mother. She earns $1,200 every two weeks, and has started a regular savings program
now that she no longer owes payments on any outstanding debts and has monthly
surplus income. She receives minimal, if any, regular child support assistance from her
children’s father, but her brother helps with tuition payments for her daughter. She
testified credibly and convincingly that she never intends to incur delinquent debt again,
and will continue the responsible budgeting and spending pattern she has followed over
the past two years. She also highly values her present employment opportunity, is very
sensitive to security issues and requirements, and knows well that future irresponsibility
will not be tolerated. (Tr. at 36-41, 46-47.)  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
4
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Applicant’s admissions and the Government evidence raised three of
these potentially disqualifying conditions: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;”
“(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the absence of any
evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the
debt;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” There was neither any
allegation nor proof of compulsive, addictive, or problem gambling. Nor was there any
evidence of drug abuse, alcoholism, tax evasion, or illegal financial practices. Simply,
Applicant went through a period of three or four years during which she carelessly ran
up credit card debt without regard for the long-term implications. She was willing to
satisfy those debts, but unable to do so because of a period of unemployment after
which her income was insufficient to afford substantial debt payments while avoiding
new debts. She finally realized that bankruptcy was her only practical option. She
availed herself of that lawful manner to resolve her delinquent indebtedness, and
incurred no new debts since returning to work in April 2007. Accordingly, AG ¶ 19(a) no
longer applies to Applicant, leaving only potential concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(b) or (c).
She is no longer at any risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds, since
her income more than meets her regular living expenses, and all of her former debt has
5
been lawfully discharged. Only if her history of not meeting financial obligations incurred
through frivolous spending indicates current poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations should those admitted facts support
present security concerns.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from a
history of unpaid debt or frivolous spending. Since Applicant did not dispute the
legitimacy of any SOR-listed debt, the four potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s formerly delinquent debts all arose more than two years ago, as a
result of a period in her life when she responded to emotional distress by spending
more than she earned on herself and remaining loved ones. She left a bad work
situation and found much more satisfying work two years ago. About that time she also
realized she needed to stop spending irresponsibly and did so. She has taken all
possible measures to minimize her regular living expenses and maintained gainful
employment to remain self-supporting. Her initial efforts to pay off the debts were
unworkable. Accordingly, she sought and received resolution of all her outstanding debt
through Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceedings, discharged in January 2009. These actions
by Applicant establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), since the debts arose long ago and
under circumstances she realized were wrongful and voluntarily stopped. She has
maintained financially responsible conduct and incurred no new debts for two years,
reflecting her good judgment and trustworthiness. Her improved work situation,
emotional acceptance of single motherhood, and appreciation for the requirement to
maintain responsible behavior going forward all support the conclusion that her period
of frivolous spending is unlikely to recur.
Applicant freely admitted that her period of excessive spending, while triggered
by separation from her former long-term partner, was her own fault and “stupid.”
Accordingly, she did not assert mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). After finding debt
6
consolidation plans impractical, Applicant sought the counsel of an attorney and
followed his advice that filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief was her best option. Her
debts were successfully and fully resolved through bankruptcy effective January 2009.
This establishes substantial additional mitigation and resolves remaining security
concern under AG ¶ 20(c).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves formerly delinquent debts for which she accepted responsibility, but
could not afford to repay while avoiding new debt and supporting two teenage children
as a single mother. She realized that the frivolous spending that caused these debts
could not continue, and stopped such conduct. She sought and followed the advice of
an attorney to resolve her situation lawfully through bankruptcy. She has incurred no
new debt for several years, and is living in a frugal and solvent manner on her current
income. There is little likelihood of recurrence of this problem, based on her past
responses to such troubles and her current desire to avoid any repeat of them. Her
bankruptcy discharge has completely alleviated any potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation or duress from her former debt situation, and her enthusiastic desire to
maintain eligibility for her present job provides very strong motivation for continued
responsibility. The likelihood of recurrence of her relatively brief period of financial
irresponsibility is very low under her changed and improved life circumstances, and
recently demonstrated maturity. 
On balance, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to fully mitigate reliability
and trustworthiness security concerns arising from her former failure to satisfy
frivolously incurred debts, and history of not meeting financial obligations. Overall, the
7
record evidence leaves no doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns
arising from her financial considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
