 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03753
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
April 29, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on July 27, 2007.  On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on August 1, 2008, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on February 2, 2009.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information
in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on February 6, 2009, and he submitted no reply.  The case was assigned to the
undersigned for resolution on April 17, 2009.  Based upon a review of the FORM,
 
2
Applicant’s responses and the exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 29 years old and unmarried.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as a PC Client Administrator, and is applying for a security clearance in
connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline D - Sexual Behavior).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because his sexual behavior
involved a criminal offense, is indicative of a personality or emotional disorder, reflects
lack of judgment or discretion, or may subject the individual to undue influence or
coercion, or reflects lack of judgment or discretion.  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations that raise questions abut his ability to protect classified
information.   
The Applicant admits to the allegation set forth in the SOR under the respective
guidelines set forth above.
During an interview conducted by an authorized investigator for the Department
of Defense, on October 3, 2007, the Applicant admitted that he was addicted to
pornography.  He explained that if anyone threatened to tell his family about his
addiction, he would divulge information to them, possibly restricted or classified
information to prevent his family from finding out.  A hypothetical presented to him by
the investigator was that if an attractive female solicited restricted or classified
information from him, would he be tricked into providing that information to her.  The
Applicant candidly acknowledged that it is possible that he could be tricked into talking
about it or be susceptible to being influenced due to his lack of social skills.      
In his Answer to the SOR dated August 1, 2008, Applicant stated that he views
pornography no less than 4 -7 times a week.  He believes that this sexual behavior
could provide someone with an opportunity for coercion or undue, blackmail or undue
influence.  To negate the risk of blackmail or coercion, Applicant states that on July 25,
2008, he told his parents about his pornography addiction.  I find the Applicant to be
candid and truthful.   
 
3
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent guidelines.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Guideline D -Sexual Behavior
12.   The Concern.  Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  No adverse inference concerning the standards in this Guideline may be
raise solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
13(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that
the person is unable to stop to that may be symptomatic of a personality disorder; 
13(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
 
4
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community
standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that
country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States may service as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or other
group.
  
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
 
5
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . .  shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior)
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) that establishes doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown
between Applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified
information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.  The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSION
Having considered the evidence in light of the appropriate legal standards and
factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the record, this
Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its case as to all
allegations in the SOR, and that Applicant's pattern of inappropriate sexual behavior
and personal conduct has a direct and negative impact on his suitability for access to
classified information.  
The Applicant admits that he is addicted to pornography.  Considering the
evidence in totality, this demonstrates a pattern of inappropriate sexual behavior and
high risk conduct that could subject the Applicant to pressure, coercion and/or
blackmail, which in turn could subject the Government to a security risk.  
Applicant’s high risk behavior places him in a vulnerable position to be
susceptible to pressure, coercion and/or blackmail.  He currently views pornography at
least 4 - 7 times a week.  His addiction is a pattern of compulsive sexual behavior that
he cannot stop.  This behavior could provide someone the opportunity to coerce,
pressure or blackmail him into divulging sensitive, protected or classified information.
Although the Applicant states that he recently told his parents about his addiction, there
is no evidence in the record to show that his employer, co-workers, friends, members of
6
his community or anyone else is aware of his addiction.  Thus, the risk is great that the
Applicant may fall prey to exploitation, coercion or duress.  Applicant’s pattern of high
risk behavior places the national interest at significant risk.  
Under Guideline D, Disqualifying Conditions 13(b), a pattern of compulsive, self-
destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that the person is unable to stop to that may be
symptomatic of a personality disorder and, 13(c), sexual behavior that causes an
individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress apply.  None of the
mitigating conditions are even remotely applicable.  The Applicant has not met his
burden of demonstrating that his sexual behavior does not raise a security concern, and
Guideline D is found against the Applicant.
With respect to the Applicant’s personal conduct, Under Guideline E,
Disqualifying Condition 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about
one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal,
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in any
activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United
States may service as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or
intelligence service or other group applies.  None of the mitigating factors are
applicable. Clearly, Applicant’s addiction to pornography, if known, could affect his
personal, professional, or community standing.
  
 I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, an
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
  
Considering all of the evidence presented, it does not come close to mitigating
the negative effects of his sexual behavior and the impact that it can have on his ability
to properly safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the
Applicant has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a
security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant
as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
SOR.    
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
         Paragraph 1:   Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against the Applicant
Paragraph 2:   Against the Applicant
 Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
