1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-05869
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires fo Investigation Processing (E-
QIP) Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 22, 2008. On December 10,
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. That burden has two components. First, the
government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern. See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009), (concurring
and dissenting, in part).
GE 1 (e-QIP) at 6, 11-14; Tr. 20-21.2
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 30, 2008. He
answered the SOR in writing on January 22, 2009, and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 26, 2009. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 27, 2009, and I received the case
assignment on March 3, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 9, 2009, and
I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 30, 2009. The government offered two
exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He submitted three exhibits (AE) A
through C, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 3, 2009. I held the record open until
April 14, 2009, for the submission of additional matters.  Applicant timely submitted the
additional evidence, which is marked as AE D and admitted into the record without
objection. The record closed on April 14, 2009.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Motion to Amend SOR
At the end of testimony, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add a
new Guideline E allegation. (Tr. 84-93.) Applicant objected to the motion, arguing that
he had not received prior notice and had not prepared to defend the new allegation. I
denied the motion under due process considerations because Applicant had no prior
notice of this new allegation. I also concluded that since the government had notice of
this potential issue as of January 21, 2009, it had sufficient time to prepare an amended
SOR, which would have given Applicant an opportunity to prepare a response to the
allegation at the hearing. (Tr. 94.)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 21, 2009, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the
factual allegations in ¶ 1.c of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to1
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
Applicant, who is 49 years old, was born and raised in the United States (U.S.)
He currently works for a Department of Defense contractor as a managing consultant in
security. He began working as a federal contractor in 2003 for another company. His
current employer requested that he apply for a security clearance.2
GE 1, supra note 2, at 27-30; Tr. 20, 50-54.3
GE 1, supra note 2, at 19-20; Tr. 55-57; 66-67.4
GE 1, supra note 2, at 22; Tr. 59-61.5
8 USCS § 1481 et seq addresses when a U.S. citizen may loss citizenship status and the government’s6
burden of proof in such cases.
GE 2; Tr. 22-32.7
3
Applicant graduated from high school. In July 1978 at age 18, he enlisted in the
U.S. Army. He served on active duty from 1978 until 1981. During this time, the Army
assigned Applicant to a tour of duty in Turkey. Although he was a military policeman in
Turkey, he held a sensitive compartmented information (SCI) clearance. In 1981, he
joined the Army reserves and began attending a two-year military college as a cadet.
Although the Army reserves paid him as an E-5, the Army did not pay for this education.
He paid for his college through the GI bill and with his money. Applicant received an
Associate of Arts degree in statistics in May 1983.3
Applicant married his first wife, who was an Australian citizen, in December 1983,
while a junior in college. He received his bachelors degree in May 1985. Shortly after his
college graduation, he returned to active duty in the Army as a Second Lieutenant.  He
served on active duty from August 1985 until November 1988. During this time, he
served an unaccompanied year in Korea and was promoted to First Lieutenant. He also
held a secret clearance as an officer.4
Applicant’s first wife gave birth to a daughter in October 1985. His first wife
became very homesick. She told him she intended to return to Australia with their
daughter. To preserve his family, Applicant agreed to move to Australia. The Army
honorably discharged him in November 1988, and two weeks later he moved to
Australia with his family.5
When he arrived in Australia, Applicant and his family lived with his in-laws, while
he sought employment. He could not find permanent employment quickly. In late
December 1988, Applicant contacted the Australian Army recruiting office and asked
about joining the military. As a condition for his commission, the Australian Army
required him to apply for Australian citizenship, which he did.  Upon proof of his6
application, the Australian Army commissioned him in February 1989. His son was born
in 1989 in Australia. Australia granted him citizenship in November 1990. He never
renounced his U.S. citizenship; rather he maintained dual citizenship with the U.S. and
Australia. He also maintained both a U.S. and Australian passport.  7
While in the Australian Army, Applicant attended graduate school, earning a
masters degree in business computing. The Australian Army paid for this education and
required him to serve an additional 18 months of military service. During his years in the
Australian Army, Applicant served as a section commander in artillery guns, a unit
GE 2, supra note 7; Tr. 67-69.8
Tr. -38-39, 46-49, 77-80.9
Tr. 19-20, 41-43, 69-70, 10
Id. at 41-44.11
4
which used American made guns; a parachute jumper as he did in the American Army,
and as the assistance administrator for the Australian Joint Intelligence Center. He held
a top secret clearance while in the Australian Army. He described the Australian Army in
which he served as not a nuclear capable military.  8
As a citizen of Australia, Applicant paid taxes. He also voted in Australian
elections, because voting is compulsory for Australian citizens. Applicant never owned
property in Australia. He and his family lived in Army housing. While in the Australian
Army, Applicant contributed money to a superannuation program, a program similar to a
401k. The Australian Army also contributed to this program. At age 55, Applicant is
entitled to take a lump sum payment from the program, which he plans to do. As of
January 11, 2009, this retirement fund was valued at $87,255. He will not receive a
monthly retirement benefit from the Australian government or military.9
 
In 1996, his third child, a daughter was born. Less than six months after her birth,
he and his first wife separated. He remained in Australian and in the Australian Army for
two more years. In the summer of 1998, he resigned from the Australian Army at the
rank of Major and returned to the United States. He and his first wife divorced in 2001.
Applicant married his second wife, who was born and raised in the U.S., six weeks after
his divorce. They have two sons, ages 7 and 4, who were born in the U.S. He lives in
the U.S. with his second family. His three children from his first marriage live in
Australia. His two daughters are dual citizens of the U.S. and Australia. His son is an
Australian citizen. He is working towards obtaining U.S. citizenship for his son. He wants
his three older children to have U.S. citizenship in addition to their Australian
citizenship.10
As an Australian citizen, Applicant held an Australian passport along with his U.S.
passport. For many years and because of the ease afforded to him, he used his
Australian passport to enter and exit Australia and his U.S. passport to enter and exit
the U.S. Since leaving Australia, he returned several times to visit his children. His last
visit occurred in March 2007, when he returned to Australia for the funeral of a friend.
His daughters have U.S. and Australian passports.11
Since returning to the U.S., Applicant worked as a consultant and as a federal
government contractor. He also voted in U.S. elections. In 2003, he held a contractor
position with a federal agency. When the agency learned that he claimed dual
citizenship, it advised him that he could not work for them unless he renounced his
Australian citizen. Within a week, Applicant notified the Australian embassy that he
wanted to renounce his Australian citizen and turned in his passport. Australia formally
AE D; Tr. 40-46 72-74. 12
AE A; AE B; AE C: Tr. 27, 92-93.13
5
accepted his renunciation and declared him not a citizen of Australia on June 20, 2003.
His Australian passport immediately became invalid. Once he renounced his Australian
citizenship, he returned to his federal contractor job.  12
Applicant credibly testified that he believed he was not going against the U.S. by
joining the Australian Army. He always considered himself a U.S. citizen and the U.S.
his homeland. He wants his three older children to have dual citizenship with Australia
and the U.S. His former military commander and a former military co-worker wrote a
strong letters of recommendation on his behalf, indicating that the only reason Applicant
joined the Australian Army was to keep his family together. A more recent co-worker
also wrote a strong letter of recommendation on his behalf. All believe that he would
never betray classified information and do not doubt his allegiance to the U.S.13
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
After any decision, the losing party has a right to appeal the case to the Defense Office of Hearings and14
Appeals  Appeal Board. The Appeal Board’s review authority is limited to determining whether three tests are
met:
E3.1.32.1. The Administrative Judge’s findings of fact are supported by such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record. In making this review, the Appeal Board shall
give deference to the credibility determinations of the Administrative Judge:
E#.a.32.2. The Administrative Judge adhered to the procedures required by E.O. 10865
(enclosure 1) and this Directive: or
E3.1.32.3. The Administrative Judge’s rulings or conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.
The Appeal Board does not conduct a “de novo determination”, recognizing that its members have
no opportunity to observe witnesses and make credibility determinations. The Supreme Court in United States
v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667, 690 (1980) succinctly defined the phrase “de novo determination”:
[This legal term] has an accepted meaning in the law. It means an independent determination
of a controversy that accords no deference to any prior resolution of the same controversy.
Thus, in Renegotiation Board v. Bannercraft Clothing Co., 415 U.S. 1, 23 [(1974)], the Court
had occasion to define “de novo proceeding” as a review that was “unfettered by any
prejudice from the [prior] agency proceeding and free from any claim that the [agency’s]
determination is supported by substantial evidence.” In United States v. First City National
Bank, 386 U.S. 361,368 [(1967)], this Court observed that “review de novo” means “that the
court should make an independent determination of the issues” and should not give any
special weight to the [prior] determination of the administrative agency.
(Internal footnotes omitted). See ISCR Case No. 07-10396 (App. Bd., Oct. 2, 2008) and ISCR Case No. 07-
07144 (App. Bd., Oct. 7, 2008). In ISCR Case No. 05-01820 (App. Bd. Dec 14, 2006), the Appeal Board
criticized the administrative judge’s analysis, supporting grant of a clearance for a PRC-related Applicant, and
then decided the case itself. Judge W hite’s dissenting opinion cogently explains why credibility determinations
and ultimately the decision whether to grant or deny a clearance should be left to the judge who makes
witness credibility determinations. Id. at 5-7. See also ISCR Case No. 04-06386 at 10-11 (App. Bd. Aug. 25,
2006)(Harvey, J., dissenting) (discussing limitations on Appeal Board’s authority to reverse hearing-level
judicial decisions and recommending remand of cases to resolve material, prejudicial error) and ISCR Case
No. 07-03307 (App. Bd. Sept. 29, 2008). Compliance with the Agency’s rules and regulations is required. See
United States ex. rel. Acardi  v. Shaughnessy, 347 U.S. 260, 268 (1954); Lopez v. FAA, 318 F.3d 242, 247-
248 (D.C. Cir 2003); Nickelson  v. United States, 284 F. Supp.2d 387, 390 (E.D. Va. 2003)( explaining
standard of review).
6
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.  14
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
7
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign
country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country;
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;
and
(7) voting in a foreign election;
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen;
Applicant moved to Australia in 1988. He applied for Australian citizenship when
he joined the Australian Army in 1989. Australia granted him citizenship in November
1990 and he became a dual citizen of the U.S. and Australia. He served in the
Australian Army for nearly 10 years. He will receive money from a superannuation
program, to which he contributed funds when he was in the Australian Army. As a
8
citizen of Australia, he was required to vote in elections and did. The government has
established a security concern under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1)-(4), 10(a)(7), and 10(b).
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. In this case,
the potential applicable mitigating conditions are:
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.
Applicant left Australia almost 11 years ago. Since that time, he has not
exercised right of citizenship except to hold and use his Australian passport when
visiting Australia. Six years ago, Applicant renounced his Australian citizenship when he
learned it would impede his employment as a contractor at a federal facility. As of June
2003, Australia no longer considered him a citizen and his Australian passport became
invalid. Since returning to the U.S., Applicant has exercised his rights of U.S. citizenship
by voting in U.S. elections, paying taxes, and holding a U.S. passport. His recent
actions support his testimony that he always considered himself a U.S. citizen and
indicate his preference for the U.S. Applicant has mitigated the government’s security
concerns.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
9
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is more substantial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, even if not
specifically discussed. Applicant married an Australian-born woman in 1983 and their
first daughter was born in 1985. His wife became very homesick and decided to return
to Australia with their daughter, with or without Applicant. To preserve his family,
Applicant resigned his commission in the U.S. Army and moved to Australia, a drastic
move because at the time, it appeared it would be a permanent change of country. He
would no longer live in the U.S., his homeland. 
Applicant did not immediately find permanent work in corporate Australia. He
talked with the Australian Army about joining based on his nearly 10 years of military
experience in the U.S. Army. As a condition to joining the Australian Army, he applied
for Australian citizenship, which Australia granted to him in November 1990. He made
this decision, not for personal financial gain, but as a means to provide for his family
and not be dependent upon his wife’ parents for housing and other essentials of life. He
wanted to be responsible for his family and he could take care of his family with a job in
the Australian Army.
Applicant remained in Australia for nearly 10 years, working in the Australian
Army until he decided to return to the U.S. He and his wife separated in 1996. Two
years later, he decided to return to the U.S., his homeland. He did not immediately
renounce his Australian citizenship upon his return to the U.S. Rather, he continued to
use his Australian passport, a benefit of Australian citizenship, to visit his three children
in Australia.  Since his return to the U.S., he has exercised his rights of U.S. citizenship,
which shows a preference for the U.S. Other than maintenance of his Australian
passport, Applicant did not exercise any rights of Australian citizenship after he returned
to the U.S.
In 2003, Applicant renounced his Australian citizenship and returned his
Australian passport when he learned that his Australian citizenship interfered with his
continued employment as a federal contractor. He made the decision to renounce his
Australian citizenship because he considered himself a U.S. citizen first. He returned to
the U.S. after his marriage ended because the U.S. was his homeland and his preferred
place of residence. Although his employment spurred his decision to renounce his
Australian citizenship, his renunciation was not purely for financial gain. Again, he
needed to work to support his family and he had skills which were beneficial to the U.S.
government. Prior to his renunciation, he had shown his preference for the U.S. by
returning to the U.S., by working in the U.S., by marrying a U.S. citizen, and by raising
his second family in the U.S. He has not indicated any intent to return to Australia.
Rather, he has successfully worked to obtain U.S. citizenship for his two daughters and
his still working towards U.S. citizenship for his son. His efforts to make sure his three
older children have U.S. citizenship indicate again his preference for the U.S. over
10
Australia. While his decision 20 years ago to apply for Australian citizenship and join the
Australian Army raises some concerns about his eligibility to hold a security clearance,
these concerns are outweighed by the actions he has taken in the last 10 years, which
shows a preference for the U.S., not Australia. The fact that he is entitled to a payment
from a 401k type retirement program at age 55 does not show a preference for Australia
over the U.S. He contributed money from his earnings to this program and will take the
lump sum payment as soon as he is eligible to accept the payment. He invested his
money in a retirement program and will receive a return on his investment at age 55.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline C. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
