 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
 
 
 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 l )  ISCR Case No. 08-08178 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Thomas Coale, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on April 10, 2008. On December 12, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on December 29, 2008.  His answer to the SOR was 
undated and contained one attachment, which was admitted, without objection, as 
Applicant’s exhibit (Ex.) A. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant requested that his case 
be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on February 19, 2009. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 7. By letter dated February 20, 2009, DOHA forwarded a 
copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information 
and/or objections within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the file on February 26, 
2009. His response was due on March 28, 2009. He filed additional information within 
the required time period. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s submissions, 
which have been identified as Ex.s B through N and admitted to the record. On March 
26, 2009, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 17 allegations of financial delinquency under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.q.) and two allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under AG E, Personal Conduct. (Item 1.) In his undated Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted 14 of the Guideline F allegations of financial delinquency (¶¶ 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., 
1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 1.m., 1.n., 1.o., and 1.p.) He denied three Guideline F 
allegations (¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., and 1.q.). He denied the two Guideline E allegations of 
deliberate falsification of answers on his e-QIP. (¶ 2.a. and ¶ 2.b.).  (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old and employed in a computer support position by a 
federal contractor. He has a high school diploma and some additional vocational school 
training. In 1973, he enlisted in the U.S. military, served for three years, and received an 
honorable discharge. He was married in 1978, and he has three adult children. In 
October 2008, he reported a net monthly salary of $2,370. His fixed monthly expenses 
were $770, and he paid $2,064 toward his mortgage and three debts. His budget 
showed a negative monthly remainder of $463. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6, 8-9.) 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged on the SOR total $38,736. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for debts totaling $34,898. Credit reports 
supplied by Applicant and the government showed his debts arose between 
approximately 2005 and 2008. Judgments were levied against him in 2005, 2006, and 
2007. He provided documentation to corroborate his assertion that a judgment levied 
against him in 2007 had been satisfied by wage garnishment and released. Additionally, 
he provided documentation to corroborate his statement that a judgment for $470, 
levied by a medical provider, had been satisfied on August 5, 2005. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c; Item 3; Item 4; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7; Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. E.) 
 
  
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 
 In addressing his additional debts, Applicant admitted financial responsibility for 
nine accounts in collection status (SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.k., 1.o., and   
1.p.) He denied and planned to dispute one collection account (SOR ¶ 1.q.). He 
admitted one unsatisfied judgment (SOR ¶ 1.b.), one education account in charged-off 
status (SOR ¶1.j.), one account that was 90 days past due (SOR ¶ 1.m.), and an 
unsatisfied debt resulting from the involuntary repossession of an automobile (SOR ¶ 
1.n.) He also admitted an arrearage of $7,169 on his home mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.l.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that his financial 
delinquencies had arisen because his wife had lost her job and he had taken a large 
pay cut in order to keep his job.1 He did not specify when these events occurred or 
report how much income he and his wife had lost to unemployment and 
underemployment. (Item 7.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a work sheet showing balances 
due on his debts, contacts he had made with creditors, and amounts he intended to pay 
each month to satisfy his delinquent debts. In response to the FORM, he provided 
documentation to show he had made a payment of $50 on March 9, 2009 on a $1,586 
judgment levied by a medical provider (SOR ¶ 1.b.); a payment of $25 on a $43 
collection account (SOR ¶ 1.d.); and a payment of $25 on March 12, 2009 on a debt of 
$9,784 resulting from an involuntary repossession of an automobile (SOR ¶ 1.n.).  (Item 
3, Ex. A; Response to FORM; Ex. G; Ex. J.) 
 
 Applicant provided documentation to show he had entered into a payment plan 
with a creditor on the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.m and had made a payment of $85. He 
provided documentation showing a payment of $25 on a $323 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.p. He also provided documentation to support his statement that he had made a 
payment of $25 on February 10, 2009 on a charged-off education debt of $2,320, 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j.  (Response to FORM, Ex. N; Ex. J; Ex. H.) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant acknowledged he had no payment plan 
in place for a $10,055 credit card debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1. k., or a $529 debt alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.o. He also stated he was working with his mortgage holder on a forbearance 
plan.  A notation on an exhibit in his response to the FORM indicated that his January 
2009 mortgage payment was returned to him by the mortgage holder, suggesting that a 
satisfactory plan to address his arrearages was not yet in place. (Response to FORM; 
Ex. B; Ex. M.) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated his intent to dispute the debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.q. on the advice of the creditor.  He provided no documentation to 
indicate that he had filed a dispute. (Response to FORM; Ex. B.) 
 
1Applicant’s Ex. A shows income of $936 for his wife. This appears to be a monthly income in addition to 
Applicant’s net monthly salary of $2,370.  Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories also shows that 
Applicant’s net biweekly pay appeared to be only $1,185.14. The record is not clear regarding Applicant’s 
net monthly family income. (Ex. A; Item 7.)  
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP on April 10, 2008. Section 28 on the 
e-QIP asks the following questions: “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?” “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts?” 
Applicant answered “no” to both questions. At the time he completed the e-QIP, he   
failed to disclose that he was delinquent on the accounts set forth in ¶ 1.b. and ¶¶ 1.d. 
through 1. q. of the SOR.2  (Item 4.) 
 
 Section 27 of the e-QIP asks several questions about an applicant’s financial 
record. Question 27d asks: “In the last 7 years, have you had any judgments against 
you that have not been paid?”  Applicant responded “no” to Question 27d.  He did not 
report a judgment filed against him in June 2006 for approximately $1,586 which had 
not been paid. In his answer to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that when he 
completed his e-QIP, he was aware of only the judgment alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a., which 
had been satisfied by garnishment in approximately September 2007. He responded 
affirmatively to Question 27b, which asks: “In the last 7 years, have you had your wages 
garnished or had any property repossessed for any reason?”  He then listed the wage 
garnishment related to the judgment alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. He did not list the involuntary 
repossession of the automobile alleged at SOR ¶ 1.n.3  (Item 5; Item 7.) 
  
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his SF-86 by 
failing to report debts of over 180 days in the past 7 years and any current debts that 
were 90 days delinquent. He also denied that his failure to list the judgment alleged at 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b. was deliberate falsification. 
 
 Applicant and his wife planned to begin credit counseling on March 19, 2009.  
(Response to FORM; Ex. B)  
 
         Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
 
2 Applicant denied the judgments alleged at ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c. of the SOR and provided documentation to 
corroborate that the judgments were satisfied in 2005 and 2007, before he completed his e-QIP in April 
2008.  
 
3 Applicant’s credit reports show that the automobile repossession occurred after Applicant completed his 
e-QIP. (Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
5 
 
 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable to 
pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies that dates to at least 2005 and 
2006. His delinquencies are recent and on-going. They have occurred under 
circumstances that are likely to recur.  
 
Applicant and his wife experienced a financial downturn when she lost her job 
and, at the same time, he took a pay cut in order to retain his job. The record indicates 
that these circumstances contributed to his delinquencies and were beyond his control. 
To show good faith in resolving his many financial delinquencies, Applicant has made 
initial payments on some of his debts, and he promises to pay or settle most his debts in 
the future. However, one of his major delinquencies, a debt of over $10,000 to a credit 
card company, remains unresolved. The record is unclear regarding the status of his 
home mortgage arrearages. Applicant reported that he and his wife were scheduled to 
begin financial counseling in mid-March 2009. In determining an individual's security 
worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might 
resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999).  I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply to the facts of 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s case. I also conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply in 
mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and signed his e-QIP in April 2008, he responded 
“no” to a question asking if he had been over 180 days delinquent on any debts in the 
last seven years. He answered “no” to a question asking if he was currently over 90 
days delinquent on any debt. He answered “no” to a question asking if he had any 
judgments placed against him in the last seven years that had not been paid.   
 
 The SOR alleged that Appellant’s responses to the financial questions on his e-
QIP showed he had deliberately falsified material facts by deliberately failing to admit 
and disclose a judgment, debts that were delinquent over 180 days in the last seven 
years, and debts that were currently 90 days delinquent.  
  
This information raises a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), which reads as 
follows: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
  Appellant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated if “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts.”  AG ¶17(a).     
 
Applicant did not make good-faith efforts to correct the omissions before being 
confronted with the facts. He denied his answers constituted deliberate falsification, and 
he offered no explanation for his failure to acknowledge or report on his e-QIP long-
standing financial delinquencies that totaled nearly $35,000. 
 
When he completed his e-QIP, Applicant also denied knowledge of any unpaid 
judgments against him. In his response to DOHA interrogatories, he stated that when he 
completed his e-QIP, he was only aware of the judgment alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a, the 
judgment that caused Applicant’s wages to be garnished in 2007. He did not report a 
judgment for $1,586, filed against him by a medical provider in June 2006. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Applicant’s silence and failure to address these omissions is a matter of security 
concern. He provided no credible evidence to mitigate his failure to report his financial 
delinquencies on his e-QIP. Nothing in the record suggests that he took prompt good 
faith action to correct the omissions, concealments or falsifications before he was 
confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(a).  I conclude that his falsifications were deliberate.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. For a period of time before 
completing his e-QIP, Applicant was aware of his financial delinquencies, which dated 
to at least 2005. Most of his actions to pay or settle his financial delinquencies were 
recent. While he made preliminary payments to some of his debtors, he had not 
established a track record of consistent  payment of his debts over a period of time. 
 
 He allowed three debts to proceed to judgment. One judgment was satisfied in 
2005; the other judgment was resolved by garnishment, thereby putting Applicant on 
notice that he had financial problems. Even though he had financial difficulties, he did 
not approach his creditors, alert them to his financial problems, and attempt to find a 
responsible resolution for paying or settling his debts. 
 
To their credit, Applicant and his wife are seeking financial counseling, and they 
might find it beneficial to seek legal advice about resolving their debts and acquiring 
financial stability in the near term. Applicant can reapply for a security clearance one 
year after the date that this decision becomes final. If he wishes, he can produce new 
evidence that addresses the Government’s current security concerns.    
 
 
9 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.l: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.n through 1.q: Against Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant  
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
