 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01038 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns arising from his 
contacts and relationship with residents and citizens of Brazil. He failed to mitigate the 
foreign preference security concerns raised by his continuous exercise of his Brazilian 
citizenship. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on November 28, 
2006. On July 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the government’s security concerns 
under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 The SOR 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or revoked. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 16, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 8, 2008, scheduling a hearing on 
January 21, 2009. The hearing was conducted as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 15, which were 
admitted without objection (Tr. 33). Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented 
four exhibits, marked AE 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 40, AE 
4). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 29, 2009. I closed the 
record on February 6, 2009.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – e, and SOR ¶¶ 2.a – c, 
and 2.e, with one correction and explanations. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.d. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old information technology network administrator working 
for a defense contractor since 2002 (GE 1). He was born in the United States to a U.S. 
born father, and Brazilian mother (Tr. 39-40). At age 11, his mother moved back to 
Brazil with Applicant, where he grew up and was educated. From age 18 to 23, 
Applicant lived in the United States and attended college. He received his bachelor’s 
degree in 1981 (Tr. 6). After college, he returned to Brazil and lived there for three 
years. He returned to the United States at age 26, and thereafter, he has consistently 
resided in the United States, except for short vacation periods in Brazil. 
 
Applicant did not serve in the Brazilian or U.S. military forces. He explained that 
he attended a mandatory induction meeting in Brazil, but was excused from military 
service because of his bad eyesight. He never worked in Brazil or for the Brazilian 
government. In 1987, following his return to the United States from Brazil, Applicant 
started working for a U.S. government agency (Tr. 41-44). After a few years he formed 
his own company and worked as a subcontractor for different U.S. agencies. After his 
company went out of business, he was hired by several government contractors. He 
has had access to classified information at the secret level since 2003 (Tr. 7-10). 
 
Applicant’s Brazilian wife came to the United States as a college student, and 
received a master’s degree in contracting (Tr. 67). After college, she was hired by the 
Brazilian Navy to work in the United States as a civilian purchasing agent (Tr. 65). He 
2  Applicant was allowed additional time to submit a statement from his Facility Security Officer. 
 
3 
 
 
married his Brazilian wife in September 1989 (Tr. 65). They have two U.S. born children 
of this marriage: a 15-year-old son, and a 13-year-old daughter. His wife and children 
have valid Brazilian passports. While working for the Brazilian Navy, she sponsored into 
the United States a Brazilian live-in nanny. The nanny worked and lived with them from 
2000 to 2008. Since the summer of 2008, the nanny has been living with her boyfriend 
and working during the day for Applicant (Tr. 76).  
 
After leaving that job, his spouse worked for a U.S. private company. In 2006, 
she was hired by her current employer, a large world organization as a purchasing 
agent. She is a legal foreign resident (green card holder) applying for U.S. citizenship.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is 78 years old. She is a retired elementary school 
teacher. His wife communicates with her mother in a weekly basis. She also 
communicates with her siblings (two brothers and one sister) at least once a month. 
They call each other for birthdays and special occasions (Tr. 72). Two of his wife’s 
siblings are law clerks and work for the Brazilian government (Tr. 70). Her other brother 
is an engineer, currently working for a private corporation in another foreign country. 
Applicant’s in-laws are citizens and residents of Brazil. Applicant’s sister-in-law has 
visited them approximately four times since their wedding. His brothers-in-law have 
visited him approximately twice. Applicant’s in-laws and cousins visited and stayed with 
Applicant during the 2008 Christmas season. 
 
Whenever Applicant and his family travel to Brazil they stay with his wife’s family. 
They have vacationed in Brazil in 1999, 2000, 2001, 2005, and 2007. He and his family 
plan to travel to Brazil in the summer of 2009 
 
Applicant’s 82-year-old mother is a Brazilian citizen residing in the United States 
(Tr. 77). She worked for the Brazilian Navy procurement office in the United States and 
in the Brazilian embassy (Tr. 47). In 1987, she was forced to retire (after a car accident) 
from her job as an administrative assistant to the Brazilian embassy’s foreign service 
office (Tr. 78-80). She has worked as a real state agent thereafter. Applicant’s father 
was U.S. sailor who served during World War II as a gunner in a B-17 (Tr. 45). 
Applicant had little contact with his father after his mother returned to Brazil. 
 
In 1997, a DOHA administrative judge granted Applicant access to classified 
information at the secret level. The security concerns adjudicated then were basically 
the same Guidelines B and C security concerns alleged in the pending SOR. At his 
1997 hearing, Applicant promised he would surrender his passport and renounce his 
Brazilian citizenship. In 2003, Applicant attempted to surrender his Brazilian passport, 
but was not allowed to do so. According to Brazil’s law, he cannot renounce his 
citizenship (Tr. 39, Answer).  
 
Applicant and his wife have immediate and extended family in Brazil and he feels 
obligated to visit them and to ensure his children know and share with their relatives in 
Brazil. He is willing to renounce his Brazilian citizenship and to surrender his passport, 
but only if he could use his U.S. passport to travel in and out of Brazil. Because he is 
 
4 
 
 
not allowed to enter and leave Brazil without his Brazilian passport he renewed his 
Brazilian passport and maintains his Brazilian citizenship. As of January 2009, he had 
not fully surrendered his passport and had not renounced his Brazilian citizenship. 
 
Since receiving his security clearance in 2003, Applicant used his Brazilian 
passport twice (2005 and 2007) to travel to Brazil (Tr. 52). He traveled to four other 
foreign countries and always used his U.S. passport. According to his facility security 
officer (FSO), Applicant has complied with all security rules and regulations. To 
minimize the security concerns raised by his possession of a Brazilian passport, in 
2003, he surrendered his passport to his FSO for safekeeping (Tr. 50). Applicant also 
has consistently reported all foreign contacts to his FSO in person and by email. 
Furthermore, he has notified his FSO of any upcoming foreign trips, and provided his 
FSO with trip reports at the conclusion of each trip. The FSO submitted incident reports 
through JPAS to account for Applicant’s use of his Brazilian passport and the 
circumstances of the foreign trips (AE 4). 
 
In 2005, Applicant travelled to Brazil without his passport. He was allowed to 
enter Brazil with his Brazilian identification card. However, to depart Brazil, he was 
forced to renew his passport. It will expire in August 2010 (Tr. 63). Applicant is also 
required to maintain a valid Brazilian identification card (which he updated at age 30) 
(Tr. 53), and to vote in Brazil’s presidential elections (Tr. 62). He complies with Brazilian 
laws and has consistently voted in Brazil’s presidential elections since 1987. He casts 
his vote at the Brazilian embassy in the United States. He intends to vote in future 
Brazilian presidential elections to be able to maintain his passport. If he fails to vote in 
Brazilian presidential elections, he will be denied his Brazilian identification card, 
passport, and driver’s license. Applicant also maintains a valid Brazilian driver’s license 
to be able to rent cars and drive in Brazil. He renewed his driver’s license in 2007 (Tr. 
59). 
 
 In 2007, to minimize his possession of the Brazilian passport he attempted to 
store it at the U.S. embassy in Brazil while he was in country. The embassy refused to 
hold his Brazilian passport (AE 4, Tr. 52). He plans to use his Brazilian passport when 
he visits Brazil with his family in the summer of 2009 (Tr. 63). 
 
 Applicant considers himself to be a loyal, trustworthy, and patriotic American. He 
believes he has complied with all the security conditions imposed on him to account for 
his foreign passport and his foreign trips. Having lived in a foreign country, he 
understands the privilege of living in the United States with constitutional rights and 
protections. Applicant stated he has no proprietary, economic or financial interests 
outside of the United States (Tr. 82). He owns a home in the United States with an 
estimated value of $1 million. He also has approximately $100,000 in a retirement 
account and other investments (Tr. 84). He and his family are active members of their 
community. He has voted in all U.S. local and national elections since 1987 (Tr. 84). 
 At his hearing, Applicant presented two reference letters, one from the president 
of his company, who has known and observed him during the last 11 years, and the 
second from his supervisor, who has known and observed him during the last 7 years. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
Both consider Applicant to be the consummate professional, loyal, trustworthy, reliable, 
and to display good judgment (AEs 2 and 3).  
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts. The government of Brazil is a 
charter member of the Organization of American States and a historical economic 
trading partner of the U.S. Brazil has a democratic government and is generally reputed 
to be committed to the rule of law and the upholding of human rights. The Government 
presented no evidence addressing security concerns about Brazil’s economic and 
political status, or its human rights record. There is no evidence the government of 
Brazil engages in the gathering of U.S. sensitive economic, industrial, or proprietary 
information. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.3  
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”4 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
3  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
4  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
Under AG ¶ 10(a)(1) Applicant may be disqualified for the “exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the 
foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1): 
possession of a current foreign passport, (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, 
social welfare, or other such benefits, and (7) voting in a foreign election.”  
 
Applicant was born in the United States to a U.S. born father and Brazilian 
mother. As such, he is a dual U.S. and Brazilian citizen. As of the day of his hearing, he 
possessed a valid Brazilian passport, a Brazilian identification card, and a valid drivers 
license. Since 1987, he has voted in all Brazilian national elections, as required by 
Brazilian law. AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1), (3), and (7) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate the foreign preference 
security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 Applicant was born in the United States and lived here until age 11 when his 
mother relocated to Brazil. He returned to the United States to attend college, and 
received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in the United States. He then returned to 
Brazil for three years. He has made the United States his home since age 26, and has 
worked for U.S. government contractors or U.S. agencies most of his life. He has 
worked hard for government contractors earning their trust. There is no evidence he has 
ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the United States, or that he 
lacks honesty and integrity. 
 
 All of Applicant’s financial and economic ties are in the United States. He has no 
other financial, economic, or proprietary interests in any foreign country. Applicant’s 
questionable actions (voting in Brazilian elections and possessing a valid Brazilian 
passport, identification card and driver’s license), were compelled by Brazil’s laws. 
 
 Applicant surrendered his Brazilian passport to his FSO and conscientiously 
reports any contact with foreigners, provides advance notice of his foreign trips, and 
submits a trip report to his FSO. He only uses his Brazilian passport to travel to Brazil. 
He uses his U.S. passport to travel for any other foreign travel. He attempted to 
renounce his Brazilian citizenship and to surrender his passport in 2003, but was 
informed that such action is prohibited under Brazilian law.  
 
 I find that AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) partially apply, but do not fully mitigate the foreign 
preference security concerns. In his 1997 DOHA hearing, Applicant was informed of the 
security concerns raised by his exercise of his dual citizenship. Since his 1997 DOHA 
hearing, Applicant has repeatedly expressed a willingness to renounce his Brazilian 
citizenship. Notwithstanding, he has not effectuated this offer. To the contrary, since 
1997 he has renewed his Brazilian passport, his Brazilian driver’s license, voted in 
Brazilian elections, and has continued to use his Brazilian identification card. Moreover, 
Applicant intends to continue exercising his Brazilian citizenship in the future. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant willfully continued to exercise his Brazilian citizenship knowing that it 
raises security concerns and that it would affect his ability to hold a security clearance. 
Considering the record as a whole, I find Applicant’s behavior indicates a preference for 
Brazil over the United States. Considering his past behavior, Applicant’s mere offers to 
renounce his Brazilian citizenship fail to mitigate the foreign preference security 
concerns. 
 
 For the same reasons outlined in the preceding paragraphs, I find that 
Applicant’s surrendering his Brazilian passport to his FSO, informing the government of 
future travel plans to Brazil, and providing trip reports of his whereabouts while in Brazil, 
do not fully mitigate his exercise of Brazilian citizenship and the foreign preference 
security concerns. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a persona or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 
9 
 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.5 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with his extended family members and his in-
laws who are Brazilian citizens residing in Brazil. The closeness of the relationship is 
shown by Applicant’s frequent telephone contacts with them, directly or through his wife, 
his frequent travels and vacationing in Brazil where he stays with his in-laws, and his in-
laws visits to Applicant in the United States. He expressed feeling of affection and or 
obligation for his extended family members and in-laws. 
 
This contact creates a possible risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Brazilian agents may exploit the opportunity 
to obtain sensitive or classified U.S. information. The government produced substantial 
evidence raising these three potentially disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted 
to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
 
  Six Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U. 
S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
                                                     
5  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
10 
 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant does have a strong bond of affection and obligation toward his 
Brazilian extended family members. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s contacts with his 
Brazilian family members do not raise a heightened risk of foreign exploitation. 
Considering the record as a whole -- Brazil’s form of government, its relationship with 
the United States, and that Brazil has no history of collecting sensitive information from 
the United States, the possibility of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation is 
substantially diminished. It is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of his family in Brazil and the U.S. interests. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 
(b ) and (e) apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
Applicant is a loyal and proud American. Except for approximately 10 years he 
lived in Brazil (from age 11 to 18), he has lived in the United States all his life. Available 
evidence suggests he has been a valuable employee of several government agencies 
and numerous government contractor providing important services for government 
agencies. There is no evidence Applicant has ever compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. There is no evidence he has ever taken any action 
which could cause potential harm to the United States, or that he lacks honesty and 
integrity.  
 
11 
 
 
 
On balance, there are more substantial circumstances that weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis. Applicant is exercising the rights and privileges 
of a Brazilian citizen. Moreover, he intends to continue doing so in the future. He has 
numerous family members in Brazil for whom he has feelings of affection and or 
obligation. Applicant is more concerned about his vacation trips and maintaining his 
family contacts in Brazil than about the security concerns raised by his behavior. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant’s overall behavior raises a 
significant doubt about his preference for Brazil over the United States. “Because of the 
extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong presumption against granting a 
security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it is deemed best to err on the 
side of the government’s compelling interest in security by denying or revoking [a] 
clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and circumstances, in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security 
concerns, but failed to mitigate foreign preference security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
