 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-07857 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric M. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant resolved or successfully disputed all the delinquent debts 
alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 11, 2007. On 
December 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 12, 2009; answered it on January 26, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on January 27, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
11, 2009; and the case was assigned to me on the following day. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on March 3, 2009, scheduling the hearing for March 27, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. The record closed 
upon adjournment of the hearing on March 27, 2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on April 2, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old specialist in artificial intelligence employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since August 2004. He was born 
and educated in a foreign country, and he became a U.S. citizen in September 2005. 
He holds doctoral degrees in biochemistry and mathematics (Tr. 5). He has never held 
a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married in December 1974. He, his wife, and their son came to the 
U.S. in 1995, and they all became U.S. citizens in September 2005 (Tr. 25-26). His son 
attended college in the U.S. and he obtained a bachelor’s degree and a master’s 
degree in business administration (Tr. 26).  
 
 Applicant’s father had two successive strokes in 1999 while visiting Applicant in 
the U.S., after which he suffered from severe dementia. His mother had heart disease 
and was unable to care for her husband. As a result, Applicant’s parents stayed in the 
U.S. and were cared for by Applicant and his wife (Tr. 26).  
 
 In 2005, Applicant’s mother suffered a heart attack and passed away six days 
later. Three or four weeks later, his father passed away. Applicant paid his parents’ 
medical expenses and their funeral expenses, using credit cards (Tr. 27). Part of 
Applicant’s income was in stock options; and when his employer collapsed financially, 
the stock options were worthless (Tr. 41). As a result of his parents’ unexpected medical 
and funeral expenses and the devaluation of his stock options, Applicant fell behind on 
his credit card payments. Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) dated October 1, 
2008, and November 22, 2007, reflected the five delinquent debts alleged in the SOR 
(GX 2; GX 4). 
 
 Applicant made numerous telephone calls in an effort to negotiate payment plans 
on the delinquent credit cards, but the creditors would not agree to long-term payment 
 
3 
 
 
plans. The best settlement Applicant could negotiate was to pay off the delinquent debts 
in one or two installments (Tr. 32).  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card account that Applicant closed. He 
received a settlement officer in January 2009 (AX G), and he paid the agreed amount in 
two installments (AX H). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card account that Applicant disputed on 
the ground that he never had an account with that creditor (GX 5 at 22). The dispute 
was resolved in his favor and the information deleted from his credit history (AX A).  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a credit card account that was referred for 
collection. Applicant received a settlement offer in January 2009 (AX B), and he paid the 
agreed amount in two installments (AX C; AX I). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a debt for telephone services. Applicant 
disputed this debt, and it no longer appears on his CBR (AX J). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e arose from an early termination of a lease. 
Applicant settled the debt in January 2009, and it has been deleted from his credit 
history (AX D; AX E; AX F).  
 
 Applicant is now finally stable. After paying all monthly expenses, he has a net 
monthly remainder of about $4,000 (Tr. 38). He has accumulated between $10,000 and 
$12,000 for emergencies (Tr. 39).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised where there is an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised 
when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Applicant’s financial history 
raises AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c), shifting the burden to him to extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. If any of 
the three disjunctive prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully 
established unless the conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  The first two prongs (“so long ago” and 
“so infrequent”) are not established, because Applicant’s delinquent debts were recent 
and numerous. The third prong is established, however, because his parents’ illnesses 
and untimely deaths, and the financial collapse of his previous employer are unusual 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. The final prong (“does not cast doubt”) also is 
established by Applicant’s methodical, persistent, and ultimately successful efforts to 
overcome his financial problems. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. The illness and 
untimely deaths of Applicant’s parents and the financial collapse of his previous 
employer were conditions beyond his control, and his response was reasonable and 
responsible. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(c). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
“[A]n applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that [he/she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. . . All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that [he/she] has . . . established a plan to resolve [his/her] financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” ADP Case No. 06-18900 
(App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008).  
 
Applicant produced evidence he had resolved three debts and successfully 
disputed the remaining two debts. He did not present documentary evidence showing 
 
6 
 
 
the basis for disputing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, but his testimony is corroborated by his 
updated credit report showing the entry had been deleted. Since less than seven years 
had elapsed from the time the debt was placed for collection, the most likely reason for 
its deletion was favorable resolution of Applicant’s dispute. See Fair Credit Reporting 
Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681c(a)(4) (credit report may not contain information on accounts 
placed for collection that antedate the report by more than seven years).  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). This 
condition is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He presented himself at the hearing 
as articulate, very intelligent, sincere, and very methodical. His testimony was plausible 
and credible.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
