 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-02698 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric M. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
based on his financial history and refuted the allegation of falsifying his security 
clearance application. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on August 11, 
2004. On November 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 14, 2008; answered it on November 
28, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on December 1, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 31, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on February 10, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on February 18, 2009, scheduling the hearing for March 17, 
2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 8 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through X, which were admitted without objection. 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until March 31, 2009, to enable 
him to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX Y through HH, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 25, 
2009. The record closed on March 31, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the mortgage foreclosure alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a, but he denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a that he falsified his SF 86. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old engineer technician employed by a federal contractor. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. Army for 21 years and retired as a sergeant first 
class (pay grade E-7). His service included two tours of duty in combat zones. (AX B.) 
While on active duty, he obtained an associate’s degree from a state university. He 
received consistently strong evaluation reports for his performance of duty as a 
noncommissioned officer. (AX C.) He has held a clearance since March 1982. 
 
Applicant began working for his current employer in December 2003, shortly after 
his retirement from the Army. His annual performance assessment for his current job for 
the year ending in July 2006 rated him as exceeding expectations in three of seven 
performance areas and meeting expectations in the others. (AX A.)  
 
 Applicant was married in June 1983, and he has an eight-year-old daughter from 
that marriage. He and his wife purchased property in a rural, mountainous area, where 
he built a log cabin as a vacation home. With the help of friends, he did much of the 
building himself, including felling the logs and taking them to the wood mill. (Tr. 91.) The 
exterior of the home was substantially completed in 2000. He hoped to live in the cabin 
after retirement, but his wife did not share his desire. Initially, there was no mortgage on 
the property, but he and his wife used the property as collateral for a loan of about 
$68,000, which they used to purchase their primary home. (Tr. 67-70.) 
 
 In August 2003, Applicant returned from an eight-month deployment to Iraq and 
discovered his wife had been having an affair. His wife told him the affair was over, but 
she would not disclose the identity of her paramour. They argued about the affair 
frequently. During an argument on April 30, 2004, Applicant lost his temper and struck 
her once on the side of her face. Their daughter, who was then three years old, 
witnessed the incident. Immediately after the incident, Applicant and his daughter left 
 
3 
 
 
the house and walked around for about 30 minutes. After he and his daughter returned, 
the police came to his house in response to his wife’s call. He initially refused to admit 
the police until he could talk to his wife, but he eventually admitted them. They arrested 
him and charged him with reckless endangerment, resisting arrest, terroristic threats, 
assault, and endangering the welfare of a child. He spent four or five days in jail 
because he could not post bail. (GX 3, GX 7.) 
 
 On August 5, 2004, Applicant was arraigned, pleaded not guilty, and requested a 
jury trial. In October 2004, he pleaded nolo contendere to charges of resisting arrest 
and reckless endangerment, and he was placed on probation before judgment for 18 
months. He was prohibited from having any contact with his wife or daughter during the 
probationary period, and he was required to attend domestic intervention counseling. 
He completed the counseling in February 2005. (GX 8.)  
 
Applicant and his wife separated in May 2004 and were divorced in August 2005. 
(AX V.) From May 2004 until May 2005, he was required to pay all of his wife’s living 
expenses, including the mortgage payments on both properties. (AX J, EE, FF; Tr. 78-
79, 81.) His wife was awarded 55% of his military retired pay, reducing his monthly 
gross retired pay from $1,730 to $690. (GX 2 at 4, 15; AX W at 9.) He also was ordered 
to pay child support of $612 per month. In May 2008, his child support obligation was 
recalculated by the court and adjusted downward to $517 per month, and he received a 
refund for the months of February through June 2008. (GX 2 at 5.) In June 2008, the 
state erroneously garnished his civilian pay for child support, even though the child 
support was being automatically withheld from his military retired pay. (GX 2 at 15-17.) 
 
Applicant made payments on the vacation home mortgage for about two years, 
using his military retired pay; but his loss of more than half of his military retired pay 
made it impossible for him to keep up the payments. Until the final divorce decree and 
property settlement, he was trying to pay the mortgage on the primary home, occupied 
by his wife and daughter, pay the mortgage on the vacation home, and pay the rent for 
his own residence. He contacted the lender for the vacation home and tried to work out 
a loan modification, but he was unsuccessful because his payments were not current. 
(Tr. 71; AX BB, CC.) In an effort to raise funds, he sold two trucks that were completely 
paid for. He also sold his motorcycle, and used the proceeds to pay off the loan for it. 
(Tr. 74-75; AX GG, HH.) He and an Army friend started cutting wood and power-
washing decks to generate extra money. (Tr. 79.) 
 
In January 2007, Applicant listed the vacation home for sale, with an asking price 
of $100,000. (GX 2 at 6). The property was appraised at $82,000. (AX S.) In February 
2008, he reduced the price to $75,000. (GX 2 at 9.) His realtor advised him that the 
property was difficult to sell because construction was incomplete and the house was 
deteriorating from being unoccupied and incomplete. (AX R). The mortgage holder 
foreclosed on February 20, 2008. The value of the property ($72,324) was sufficient to 
satisfy the outstanding balance on the mortgage ($66,422). (AX Q, DD.) His credit 
bureau report dated June 24, 2008 reflects a zero balance on the loan. (GX 5 at 2.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant is now current on all obligations. He has one active credit card with a 
balance of about $1,300. He has paid off the loans on a 2004 car and a 1989 truck. He 
has about $4,000 in a money market account, $350 in his bank account, and $3,000 in 
his retirement fund with his current employer. (Tr. 75-76.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a SF 86 in January 2004 (AX G, H.); and he resubmitted it 
on August 11, 2004. He did not disclose his arrest arising from the domestic incident 
when he resubmitted his SF 86, nor did he disclose that the charges based on that 
incident were pending. (GX 1.) However, shortly after the incident, he informed his 
supervisor and a member of his personnel office that he had been involved in a 
domestic violence incident. (Tr. 59, 62, 65-66; AX Z, AA.) He disclosed the incident in 
detail in a handwritten sworn statement submitted to a security investigator on 
December 6, 2004. (GX 3.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his SF 86. He admitted 
executing the signature page of his SF 86 on August 11, 2004; but he did not recall 
seeing his negative answers to the questions regarding his police record and pending 
charges. (Tr. 54, 57-58.) His explanation was that he probably signed the document 
without reading it carefully. (Tr. 64-65.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges a delinquent debt of about $70,000 on a real estate mortgage 
that was foreclosed. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Two potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised where there is an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised 
when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Applicant’s financial history 
raises these two conditions, shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
 
6 
 
 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 20(a) (“so long ago”) is not established because the 
delinquent mortgage was not resolved until recently. The second prong (“so infrequent”) 
and third prong (“unlikely to recur”), however, are established. Applicant did not have a 
history of delinquent debts until the break-up of his marriage and the resulting financial 
burdens imposed on him. The effects of his former wife’s infidelity and the marital break-
up are not likely to recur. His finances are now in order and under control. The final 
prong (“does not cast doubt”) also is established. His responsible reaction to his 
financial problems and his current financial stability have overcome any reasonable 
doubt about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(a) is established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. The break-up of Applicant’s 
marriage was beyond his control. As noted above in the discussion of AG ¶ 20(a), he 
reacted responsibly to his financial situation. I conclude this mitigating condition is 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant contacted his mortgage lender 
and attempted to negotiate a resolution. He sold his two trucks and a motorcycle. He 
took on a second job in an effort to raise money. Even though the mortgage was 
eventually foreclosed, he demonstrated good faith in his efforts to avoid foreclosure. 
The debt has been satisfied, eliminating his vulnerability to pressure or coercion. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his arrest arising from 
the domestic violence incident and deliberately failed to disclose that the charges based 
on that incident were still pending when he submitted his SF 86. The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is set out in AG ¶ 16(a) as 
follows: 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally omitting the information regarding his arrest, but 
his only explanation was that he probably overlooked the omission when he signed the 
SF 86. Such an explanation might not be credible without corroboration, but in this case 
it is corroborated by Applicant’s disclosure of the domestic violence incident to his 
supervisor and a member of his personnel office shortly after it happened and his 
detailed disclosure to a security investigator less than three months after he submitted 
his SF 86.  
 
 Applicant submitted his SF 86 a few days after his arraignment and while in the 
middle of a bitter divorce. He was still recovering from the shock of discovering his wife 
of 22 years had been unfaithful during his deployment to Iraq and struggling to deal with 
the financial consequences of his marital break-up. Under these circumstances, his 
inattention to the accuracy of his SF 86 is plausible. Applicant presented himself at the 
hearing as candid and very sincere, but somewhat unsophisticated. Under all the 
circumstances, I am satisfied that Applicant did not intentionally omit relevant and 
 
8 
 
 
material information from his SF 86. Accordingly I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
raised. No other potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are raised. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army for 21 years and held a clearance 
during most of his service, apparently without incident. The conduct raising security 
concerns was the product of his wife’s unfaithfulness, the disintegration of his marriage 
of 22 years, and the loss of his dream of retiring to live in his mountain cabin. He has 
rebounded from these setbacks and is debt free. His broken marriage is behind him.  
 
 Although it was not alleged in the SOR, I have also considered Applicant’s act of 
domestic violence as part of my whole person analysis. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (uncharged misconduct may be considered as part of 
whole person analysis). The evidence of record reflects that this incident was an 
isolated incident, triggered by his wife’s infidelity and the break-up of his marriage, and it 
is not likely to recur.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on his financial difficulties and he 
has refuted the allegation of falsifying his SF 86. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried 
his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
