 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06480 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding criminal conduct and 
alcohol consumption.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 17, 2006, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On November 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive). The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and G (Alcohol Consumption), and detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
It should be noted that on December 29, 2005, the President promulgated 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information, and on August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) 
published a memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s 
case because his SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 5, 2008. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated December 19, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on February 5, 2009, and 
the case was assigned to me on February 6, 2009. A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
March 5, 2009, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on March 24, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, five Government exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but offered no exhibits. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
was received on March 31, 2009. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the conclusion of the Government’s case, Department Counsel moved to 
amend the SOR & 1.b. to conform to the evidence presented.  There being no objection, 
the motion was granted.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted three of the factual allegations in 
the SOR (¶¶ 1.a., 2.a., and 1.b.).  He denied the one remaining allegation.  
 
Applicant is a 21-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain the SECRET security clearance which was granted to him in about June or July 
2006.2 Applicant has never been married.3 He has been gainfully employed by the 
same defense contractor since January 2006, and currently serves as a building 
support specialist.4 His employment history since 2003 includes various periods of 
1 Tr. at 16-18. 
 
2 Id. at 22. 
 
3 Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP, dated January 17, 2006), at 16. 
 
4 Tr. at 21. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
unemployment (October 2003-August 2004, August 2004-July 2005, and December 
2005-January 2006).5  
 
Criminal Conduct & Alcohol Consumption  
 
Applicant is an alcohol abuser. He was a frequent consumer of alcohol from the 
time he was about 15 or 16, while in high school.6 He initially drank beer and/or hard 
liquor with older friends, once or twice a month, generally at their homes or at his 
home.7 On the occasions when he drank at the home of friends, he would remain there 
overnight.8 Once or twice a year, his parents would catch him drinking and they would 
ground him.9 Over time, Applicant’s alcohol consumption increased in both frequency 
and quantity. Frequency-wise, it increased to three times per month.10 Quantity-wise, it 
increased from four or five beers (enough to get him drunk),11 to five to seven beers.12  
In May 2005, Applicant graduated from high school, and his drinking habits remained 
unchanged.13 
 
Applicant’s consumption of alcohol resulted in at least one incident involving law 
enforcement authorities. In November 2007, when he was 20 years old, after having 
Thanksgiving dinner with his parents, Applicant drove to a friend’s house for an evening 
of drinking with four or five other underage drinkers.14 Over the next four hours, he 
estimated he consumed either approximately 80 ounces of beer15 or two to three pints 
of beer.16 At some point, Applicant decided to return home.  While he remembers being 
slightly impaired,17 he did not feel he was intoxicated.18 While driving home, his 
5 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 3, at 12-15. 
 
6 Tr. at 22-23. 
 
7 Id. at 23-24. 
 
8 Id. 
 
9 Id. at 26. 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Id. at 23. 
 
12 Id. at 26. 
 
13 Id. at 27-28. 
 
14 Id. at 31-32. 
 
15 Id. at 33. During the hearing Applicant estimated his consumption was two 40-ounce bottles of beer.  That 
is the equivalent of about five pints or two and one-half quarts. 
 
16 Government Exhibit 2 (Interrogatories and answers to interrogatories, dated August 8, 2008), at 3.  In 
March 2008, Applicant’s estimation was two or three pints of beer.  That is the equivalent of between 32 and 48 
ounces, or between one quart and one and one-half quarts. 
 
17 Tr. at 34. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
otion.    
                                                                                                                                                                                          
attention was temporarily diverted to change a song on his iPod19 when he crashed into 
the rear of a parked vehicle, causing damage to both vehicles and injuries to himself.20 
Instead of stopping at the accident scene and calling the police, Applicant drove off.21 At 
approximately 4 a.m., the police eventually located him in a parking lot some distance 
from the scene.22  He had the “strong smell of alcohol” with “red, watery eyes.”23  
 
Applicant was charged with (1) leaving the scene of an accident with death or 
personal injury, (2) driving under the influence of liquor, drugs, or vapors (slightest 
degree), and (3) liquor violation (underage consumption).24 He was transported to the 
hospital for treatment for his injuries and administered a blood alcohol examination 
which revealed a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level of 0.215.25 In January 2008, 
he appeared in court.  Count 1 was dismissed by the prosecutor, count 3 was dismissed 
by the court, and Applicant was, upon his plea, convicted of count 2.26 He was 
sentenced to one day in jail, fined $1,800, his license was suspended, and he was 
ordered to attend traffic school, participate in counseling, and required to have a 
breathalyzer ignition system installed.27 That system remained in place until April 
2009.28 
 
There was one earlier purported alcohol-related incident which occurred in June 
2007.  Applicant and some friends were driving around when they decided to go out into 
a field and sit around drinking beer by a bonfire.  Applicant decided against having any 
alcohol.29 A complaint was filed by someone and the police arrived and administered a 
breathalyzer test to everyone.  All the tests come up with zeros.30  Nevertheless, he 
was charged with a liquor violation (underage consumption).31 The charge was 
dismissed upon the prosecutor’s m 32
 
18 Id. at 31, 33-34. 
 
19 Id. at 31-32. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 3 (Police Report, dated November 24, 2007), at  4-5. 
 
21 Tr. at 32. 
 
22 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 20, at 4. 
 
23 Id. 
 
24 Id. at 1; Government Exhibit 5 (Public Access to Court Information, dated June 25, 2008), at 1. 
 
25 Id. Government Exhibit 3, at 9. 
 
26 Government Exhibit 5, supra note 24, at 1. 
 
27 Tr. at 40-43. 
 
28 Id. at 42. 
 
29 Id. at 47-48. 
 
30 Id. at 48. 
 
31 Government Exhibit 4 (Public Access to Court Information, dated June 25, 2008). 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
In March 2008, while undergoing an interview conducted by the Office of 
Personnel Management in connection with his security clearance application, Applicant 
claimed that his consumption of alcohol ceased with his arrest in November 2007, and 
he stated he had no intention to drink alcohol again at least until he turns 21 years old.33 
He added that he never plans to drive after consuming alcohol.34 His stated plans have 
had a short shelf-life.  On at least four occasions, after consuming alcohol,35 Applicant 
attempted to start his car, but was prevented from doing so by the breathalyzer ignition 
system installed in his vehicle. In June 2008, after four or five hours of sleep after 
drinking the night before, he was probably legally intoxicated, but was not paying 
attention to how he felt because he was “just trying to get to work.”36  He went to work 
20 minutes later.37 He estimates he was slightly impaired, but not intoxicated,38 in July 
2008, October 2008, and November 2008.39  
 
Applicant continues to consume beer, but no hard liquor.40  His most recent 
consumption of alcohol occurred two weeks prior to his hearing when he had one 16-
ounce beer.41 Despite the occasions of his alcohol impairment and intoxication, 
Applicant continues to believe he can handle alcohol,42 a belief he held in November 
2007 and June 2008. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”43 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
 
 
32 Id. 
 
33 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 16, at 3-4. 
 
34 Id.  
 
35 Tr. at 53. 
 
36 Id. at 47, 50-51, 53. 
 
37 Id. at 57-58. 
 
38 In other words, he would have registered a BAC of between 0.04 and 0.08. Applicant did not believe he 
was impaired and did not feel he was impaired. 
 
39 Tr. at 46-47, 51-52. 
 
40 Id. at 54. 
 
41 Id. at 55. 
 
42 Id. 
 
43 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”44   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”45 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.46  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
44 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
45 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
46 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”47 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”48 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), an Aallegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,@ may raise security concerns. Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, 
involving at least one arrest and conviction, numerous violations of underage drinking 
law, and a June 2007 complaint, later dismissed, is documented in his police and court 
records, his answers to interrogatories, and the evidence, including his testimony, 
presented during the hearing. The Government has established AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ In addition, when there is “evidence that the person did not commit the 
offense,” AG ¶ 32(c) may apply. Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.@  
47 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
48 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
8 
                                      
 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply because Applicant’s largely unalleged (in the 
SOR) criminal conduct commenced when he was about 15 or 16 years old and 
continued until he could legally drink alcohol in October 2008, and his most recent SOR-
alleged criminal conduct occurred in November 2007, a little over one and a quarter 
years ago. Furthermore, there is no evidence of successful rehabilitation despite there 
being no further SOR-alleged criminal conduct. Had it not been for the breathalyzer 
ignition system installed in his vehicle, Applicant might have experienced another 
alcohol-related incident in June 2008. While a person should not be held forever 
accountable for misconduct from the past, without a clear indication of subsequent 
reform, remorse, or rehabilitation, I am unable to determine with reasonable certainty 
the probability that such conduct will not recur in the future.  
 
AG ¶ 32(c) applies to his alleged offense in June 2007. While Applicant may 
have been charged with a liquor violation for underage drinking, his explanation and the 
subsequent prosecution-driven dismissal support my conclusion that there is insufficient 
evidence to indicate Applicant committed any offense. This particular criminal offense, 
without more, is unsubstantiated. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 22(b), “alcohol-
related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or impaired 
condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” may raise security concerns. In addition, “habitual 
or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, may 
apply under AG ¶ 22(c).  AG ¶ 22(a) is established by Applicant’s DUI conviction; AG ¶ 
22(b), by his June 2008 attempt to rush to work while intoxicated, and actually going to 
work 20 minutes later; and AG ¶ 22(c), because he habitually consumes alcohol to the 
point of impaired judgment. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could potentially mitigate 
security concerns arising from alcohol consumption under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d). But in this 
instance, none of the mitigating conditions apply. Furthermore, after careful 
consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol consumption, I conclude 
 
9 
                                      
 
Applicant’s continued alcohol consumption to the point of impairment or intoxication 
after his DUI conviction indicates he is unwilling or unable to curtail his alcohol 
consumption. As such, his conduct demonstrates a lack of judgment and/or a failure to 
control impulses which is inconsistent with the holder of a security clearance. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and G in my analysis below.      
 
While in high school, Applicant associated with the wrong crowd and developed 
bad habits. In part, due to peer pressure, he illegally consumed alcohol, sometimes to 
excess. That alcohol abuse eventually resulted in an arrest and conviction for DUI. His 
sentence included one day in jail, a fine of $1,800, his license was suspended, and he 
was ordered to attend traffic school, participate in counseling, and required to have a 
breathalyzer ignition system installed in his vehicle, a system that remained in place 
until April 2009. That system has admittedly saved him from further, more recent, 
negative alcohol-related incidents. 
 
Despite his March 2008, claim that his consumption of alcohol ceased with his 
arrest in November 2007, and his stated intentions not to drink alcohol again at least 
until he turns 21 years old, and that he never plans to drive after consuming alcohol, he 
has continued to consume alcohol and then attempt to drive his vehicle on at least four 
occasions. Using the analogy from the Appeal Board in financial cases, Applicant has 
not established a “meaningful track record” of alcohol abstinence or more responsible 
alcohol consumption. To the contrary, his continued alcohol consumption and attempts 
at driving while impaired by alcohol, establish irresponsibility, immaturity, a cavalier 
attitude towards the law, and absence of rehabilitation, and vitiate any other mitigation 
such as the otherwise rehabilitative efforts of completing his counseling and serving his 
sentence. (See AG && 2(a)1, 2(a)(2), 2(a)(3), 2(a)4, 2(a)(5), 2(a)(6), 2(a)(7), and 
2(a)(9).) 
 
10 
                                      
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude he has failed to mitigate the criminal conduct 
and alcohol consumption security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
     
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
