 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-07284 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), based on a past due utility bill, a delinquent home mortgage, and a 
delinquent student loan. All three debts have been or are being resolved. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 14, 2008. On 
November 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 2, 2008; answered it on January 2, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on January 5, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on February 17, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 3, 2009, scheduling the hearing for March 
27, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Department Counsel also submitted 
Hearing Exhibit (HX) I, a demonstrative exhibit summarizing the documentary evidence. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record 
open until April 10, 2009, to enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 2, 2009. On April 14, 2009, I extended the 
deadline for submission of additional evidence until April 20, 2009. Applicant timely 
submitted AX C through J, which were admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel’s comments regarding AX C through J are attached to the record as HX II. The 
record closed on April 20, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, but he 
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old radar applications engineer employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since March 2008. He has worked 
for several federal contractors since August 2001, except for a three-month period of 
unemployment in 2004. He was granted a clearance in July 2002, but it was 
administratively terminated when he changed jobs. 
 
 Applicant was married in April 1996. They have no children from their marriage, 
but his wife has two children from a previous relationship, for whom she voluntarily pays 
child support of $200 per month (Tr. 58).  
 
Applicant attended college from September 1989 to May 1992. He worked in 
private industry from June 1993 to April 2001, was laid off for three or four months, and 
then worked for a federal contractor from August 2001 to February 2004, when he was 
laid off again. He was unemployed from February to May 2004, and then worked for 
another federal contractor until March 2008, when he began working for his current 
employer. He resumed college classes in May 2005, and he completed his college 
degree requirements in September 2006.  
 
Applicant’s wife became ill in 2003. She required extensive surgery, was 
hospitalized for about six months, and unable to work for about nine months, reducing 
the monthly family income by about $1,000 (Tr. 43-45). 
 
 The first debt alleged in the SOR is a past due utility bill for $128. The bill 
became due while Applicant was traveling for his employer, and he forgot to pay it. He 
 
3 
 
 
testified the account is now current (Tr. 21). His testimony was corroborated by his bank 
statement showing recent payments (AX D at 1).  
 
 The second debt alleged in the SOR is a home mortgage that became delinquent 
around August 2007. Applicant was unable to keep his payments current because his 
father passed away in July 2007 and his brother passed away a month later, causing 
Applicant to spend about $20,000 for overseas travel and funeral expenses (Tr. 32-34). 
He testified the deaths of his father and his brother “took its toll” on him financially and 
emotionally (Tr. 26). He failed to make his monthly mortgage payments of $1,000.32 for 
about five months (Tr. 39). In May 2008, he started making payments of $1,500 to make 
up for the delinquent payments (Tr. 35-37; GX 3 at 4). He stopped making payments 
after September 2008, because the lender initiated foreclosure proceedings and refused 
to accept his payments (Tr. 37). He then negotiated a loan modification agreement 
providing for monthly payments of $692.63, starting on April 1, 2009 (Tr. 34; AX B). 
Although the copy of the loan modification agreement submitted by Applicant was 
unsigned, he produced documentary evidence that he had made one payment in 
accordance with the agreement and the payment check had been cashed by the lender 
(AX J).  
 
 The third debt alleged in the SOR is a student loan with a balance of about 
$36,000 that became delinquent around August 2006. Applicant admitted his payments 
on this loan were “on and off,” but he testified he could not recall why he fell behind on 
his payments on this loan (Tr. 42). He stopped making payments when collection 
agencies started demanding $800 or $900 a month instead of the payments of about 
$300 he had been sending to the original creditor (Tr. 41). 
 
 In September 2008, Applicant entered a loan rehabilitation program for his 
student loan, and initiated an automatic debit from his checking account of $300 per 
month (GX 3 at 9-11; AX D at 2). On March 27, 2009, he was notified his student loan 
had been sold and the payment terms changed. Starting on May 16, 2009, his 
payments will be $374.67 (AX F, G, and H). 
 
 At the hearing, it was clear that Applicant was embarrassed by his history of 
delinquent debts. When advised of his right to have a personal representative assist 
him, he responded that the inquiry into his financial history was “a real personal matter,” 
and he did not want to involve any of his friends in it (Tr. 4). 
 
 Applicant and his wife do not have a family budget (Tr. 50-51). He testified his 
net family income is about $5,400 per month, with living expenses and debt payments 
totaling about $3,000, leaving a remainder of around $2,000. He testified he has 
retirement funds of about $15,000 to $20,000, and his wife has retirement funds of 
about $4,000 to $5,000 (Tr. 52). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a past due utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.a), a delinquent home mortgage 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.b), and a delinquent student loan (SOR ¶ 1.c). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Two potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 
19(a) is raised where there is an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) 
is raised when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Applicant’s 
financial history raises both of these disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to him 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. If any of 
the three disjunctive prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully 
established unless the conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
 The first two prongs of AG ¶ 20(a) (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not 
established because Applicant had multiple debts that were only recently resolved. The 
third prong (“occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur”) applies to 
the delinquent home mortgage, because it was triggered by the deaths of Applicant’s 
father and brother, but it does not apply to the utility bill or student loan. Applicant’s 
periods of unemployment occurred well before any of the debts alleged in the SOR 
became delinquent. Applicant attributed the past due utility bill to forgetfulness, and he 
 
6 
 
 
offered no cogent or plausible explanation for falling behind on his student loan. 
Although he testified about his wife’s illness and loss of income, that event preceded the 
delinquent student loan by about three years. The final prong (“does not cast doubt”) is 
established because Applicant has taken significant steps to resolve his financial 
problems and his financial situation is under control. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). This mitigating condition is established for the 
delinquent mortgage but not the other two debts, for the reasons set out above in the 
discussion of AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. “All that is 
required is that an applicant demonstrate that [he/she] has . . . established a plan to 
resolve [his/her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). Applicant’s utility account appears to 
be current. He has renegotiated payment schedules for his home mortgage and his 
student loan, and he appears to be complying with the new payment schedules. I 
conclude this mitigating condition is established for all three debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
 
7 
 
 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is relatively young, well-educated, and intelligent. He may have been 
financially naïve when he allowed the student loans to become delinquent. He was 
candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He and his wife are not careful financial 
planners. Instead, they appear to have taken an ad hoc approach to their financial 
obligations. However, Applicant has found the inquiry into his financial history 
embarrassing, and he is not likely to allow it to recur. He has a steady income and is not 
financially overextended. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on his financial history. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
