1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01208
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 17, 2009
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on November 1, 2006 (Government Exhibit 1).  On August 6, 2008, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F, J and E concerning the Applicant.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by President Bush on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on October 7, 2008, and requested a
hearing.  Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 30, 2008.  The
case was assigned to another administrative judge on November 3, 2008.  I received
the case assignment on December 18, 2008.  DOHA issued notices of hearing on
November 10, 2008, and January 8, 2009.  I convened the hearing as scheduled on
Applicant’s Exhibit K was received on April 7, 2009.  The exhibit consists of documents that, through no fault of the1
Applicant’s, should have been attached to Applicant’s Exhibit J.  Since the addition of Applicant’s Exhibit K is a strictly
ministerial act, the date the record closed does not change.
2
February 5, 2009. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which
were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted
Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, also without objection.  The Applicant asked that the
record remain open and, on February 23, 2009, she submitted Applicant’s Exhibit J,
also without objection.   DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on February 11,1
2009.  The record closed on February 23, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 39 and single, though she is in a long-term relationship with the
father of her children.  She is employed by a defense contractor as a security
administrator and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with her
employment. 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she is financially overextended and therefore at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
The Applicant submits that most of these debts occurred during periods of
unemployment and underemployment between 1994 and 2004.  The Applicant lived in
State A until 1994.  At that time she and her partner moved to State B, in order to
improve their employment prospects, and because she was going to have a baby.  They
lived in State B until 2001, but their financial situation was always difficult.  In 2001, the
Applicant moved back to State A, where her partner subsequently joined her.  She has
lived in State A since that time.  (Government Exhibit 5 at 8.)
Since October 2004 the Applicant has been employed by her current employer,
first as a temporary employee and, since March 2006, full time.  The Applicant states
that her intention is to pay all of her past due indebtedness while staying current with
her other debts.  She further testified that she began to pay her delinquent debts in
approximately 2006, when her employer indicated that the Applicant might want to clean
up her credit in relation to her job.  (Transcript at 104.)  
1.a.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a law firm in the original
amount of $13,137.13 for a judgment based on an eviction.  The Applicant’s pay is
currently being garnished to pay this judgment.  The Applicant submitted her payroll
records showing that $10,774.82 had been paid as of February 6, 2009.  She testified
that she expects this garnishment to end in April 2009.  (Government Exhibit 5 at 48-52;
3
Applicant’s Exhibit E, Exhibit F and Exhibit K at 5; Transcript at 35-40.)  Because of this
garnishment, the Applicant stopped making partial payments on other debts, as further
described below.  (Transcript at 50-52, 56.)
1.b.  The Applicant denied that she currently owed any money for a judgment in
the approximate amount of $1,698.00.  She admitted that a judgment was entered
against her for that amount based on an eviction, but she stated, “That was paid years
ago, before I moved back to [State A].”  (Transcript at 40-41.)
1.c.  The Applicant denied that she currently owed any money for a judgment in
the approximate amount of $1,512.00.  She admitted that a judgment was entered
against her for that amount based on an eviction, but she submitted evidence showing
that the judgment was satisfied.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D; Transcript at 43-45.)
1.d.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
approximate amount of $271.00.  She stated that this was in relation to a failed attempt
to obtain insurance from the Automobile Club, and that the debt is not appropriate.
However, while she has disputed this debt with the Automobile Club, the Applicant has
taken no steps to dispute this debt with the credit reporting agencies.  The Applicant has
made no payments on this debt and has no current intention to make payments on this
debt.  (Transcript at 47-48.)
1.e.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
approximate amount of $735.00.  She stated that this was in relation to her employment
activities at a prior job related to purchasing water for the office, and that the debt
should not be her responsibility.  However, she has taken no steps to dispute this debt.
The Applicant has made no payments on this debt and has no current intention to make
payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 48-49.)
1.f., 1.g. and 1.h.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted for three different
accounts in relation to her cable company.  The total indebtedness was originally
approximately $1,030.00.  She had been making partial payments on these accounts,
until she had to stop because of the garnishment discussed above.  The amount she
still owes on this debt is unknown.  (Transcript at 49-53; Applicant’s Exhibit J at 27.)
1.i.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $70.00 for a returned check.  The Applicant has made no payments on this
debt and has no current intention to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 53.)
1.j., 1.k., 1.l. and 1.m.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection
agency in the total amount of $239.00 for four returned checks.  The Applicant has
made no payments on these debts and has no current plans to make payments on
these debts.  (Transcript at 53.)
1.n.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $7,195.00 for an automobile loan in connection with a car that was wrecked.
4
The Applicant has made no payments on this debt and has no current intention to make
payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 53-54.)  
1.o.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $592.00.  She states that she paid this debt in approximately 2007.  She
disputed this debt and it was removed from her credit report.  (Transcript at 54-56;
Applicant’s Exhibit I at 3.)
1.p.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $46.00 for a returned check.  The Applicant has made no payments on this
debt and has no current intention to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 57.) 
1.q.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $734.00 for a medical bill that has been due and owing since 2001.  The
Applicant has made no payments on this debt and has no current intention to make
payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 57-58.) 
1.r.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $1,014.00.  The Applicant was making payments on this debt until April 2008,
and had reduced the debt to $814.00.  Because of the garnishment, she is not currently
making payments.  (Transcript at 58-59; Government Exhibit 5 at 46.)
1.s.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a department store in the
amount of $400.00.  She submitted evidence that she had paid the debt in 2002.  She
disputed this debt and it was removed from her credit report.  (Transcript at 58-60;
Applicant’s Exhibit I at 3 and Exhibit J at 15.)
1.t.  The Applicant denied that she was indebted to a law firm in the approximate
amount of $125.00 for a returned check.  She submitted evidence that she paid this
debt in 2007.  She disputed this debt and it was removed from her credit report.
(Transcript at 60-61; Applicant’s Exhibit J at 14.)
1.u.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a bank in the approximate
amount of $2,769.00.  She states that she was making payments on this debt and had
reduced it to approximately $2,000.00 by April 2008, when she had to stop because of
her garnishment.  (Transcript at 61-62.)
1.v.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $75.00.  She submitted evidence that she had paid this debt.  (Transcript at
62-63; Applicant’s Exhibit J at 13.)
1.w.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
approximate amount of $384.00.  The Applicant has made no payments on this debt
and has no current intention to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 64.) 
5
1.x. and 1.y.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a collection agency
in the amount of $128.00 for bad checks used to pay for her children’s passports.  The
Applicant testified that she had paid these debts.  (Transcript at 64.)
1.z.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $251.00 for a veterinary bill.  The Applicant has made no payments on this
debt and has no current intention to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 64-65.)
1.aa.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $235.00 for a medical bill.  She testified that she has a dispute with the
medical provider about the debt, but has not disputed the debt with the credit reporting
agencies.  The Applicant has made no payments on this debt and has no current
intention to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 64-67.)
1.bb.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $90.00.  The Applicant has made no payments on this debt and has no
current intention to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 67-68.)  
1.cc.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $593.00 for a telephone bill.  The Applicant has made no payments on this
debt and has no current intention to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 68.)
1.dd.  The Applicant admitted this allegation, but the evidence indicates that it is
a duplicate of 1.n.  (Transcript at 68.)
1.ee.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $130.00.  She testified that, in fact, she did not owe the telephone company
anything.  She further testified that the debt was disputed to the credit reporting
agencies and was removed.  (Transcript at 68-70; Applicant’s Exhibit I at 6.)
1.ff.  The Applicant denied that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
approximate amount of $500.00.  She submitted evidence that she paid this debt in
2001.  She disputed this debt and it was removed from her credit report.  (Transcript at
70; Applicant’s Exhibit G and Exhibit I at 6.)
1.gg.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $1,901.00.  She testified that, in fact, she did not owe anything because it
was not her account.  She further testified that the debt was disputed to the credit
reporting agencies and was removed.  (Transcript at 71; Applicant’s Exhibit I at 6.)
1.hh.  The Applicant denied that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
approximate amount of $180.00 for a utility bill.  She submitted evidence that she paid
this debt in 2007. (Transcript at 60-61; Applicant’s Exhibit H.)
1.ii.  The Applicant admits that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $443.00.  She testified that the debt was disputed to the credit reporting
6
agencies and was removed.  (Transcript at 72-73; Applicant’s Exhibit I at 7 and Exhibit J
at 12.)
1.jj. and 1.kk.  The Applicant admitted the existence of these two debts to a bank
in the total amount of $1,976.00.  The Applicant testified that she had paid these debts,
disputed them to the credit reporting agencies, and they were removed.  (Transcript at
74; Applicant’s Exhibit I at 7-8 and Exhibit J at 10.)
1.ll.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $61.00 for a returned check.  She testified that the debt was paid, disputed to
the credit reporting agencies, and it was removed.  (Transcript at 74-75; Applicant’s
Exhibit I at 8.)
1.mm.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in
the amount of $37.00 for a returned check.  She testified that the debt was paid,
disputed to the credit reporting agencies, and it was removed.  (Transcript at 74-75;
Applicant’s Exhibit I at 8, Exhibit J at 9.)
1.nn.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $60.00 for a returned check.  She testified that the debt was paid, disputed to
the credit reporting agencies and it was removed.  (Transcript at 75-76.)
1.00.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $60.00 for a returned check.  She testified that the debt was paid, disputed to
the credit reporting agencies and it was removed.  (Transcript at 75-76.)
1.pp.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $58.00 for a returned check.  She testified that the debt was paid, disputed to
the credit reporting agencies and it was removed.  (Transcript at 76-77; Applicant’s
Exhibit I at 8.)
1.qq.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $80.00 for a medical debt.  The Applicant has made no payments on this
debt and has no current plans to make payments on this debt.  (Transcript at 77.)
1.rr.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $200.00 for telephone services.  She testified that the debt was paid,
disputed to the credit reporting agencies and it was removed.  (Transcript at 77-78;
Applicant’s Exhibit I at 10.)
1.ss.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $64.00 for a returned check.  She testified that the debt was paid, disputed to
the credit reporting agencies and it was removed.  (Transcript at 78; Applicant’s Exhibit I
at 11.)
7
1.tt.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $262.00.  She testified that the debt was paid, disputed to the credit reporting
agencies and it was removed.  (Transcript at 78-79; Applicant’s Exhibit I at 11.)
1.uu.  The Applicant admitted that she was indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $1,221.00.  She testified that the debt was paid, disputed to the credit
reporting agencies and it was removed.  (Transcript at 78-80; Applicant’s Exhibit I at 11
and Exhibit J at 8.)
1.vv.  The Applicant denied owing a collection agency $3,502.00 for a past due
account to a bank.  She submitted evidence that a settlement had been made on this
account and she had paid this debt in 2007.  (Transcript at 80-81; Government Exhibit 5
at 22.)
1.ww., 1.xx and 1.yy.  The Applicant admits owing her current employer’s dining
facility $454.00 for three returned checks that she cashed in 2004.  She submitted
evidence showing she has paid approximately $221.00 towards this delinquency.
(Transcript at 81-82; Applicant’s Exhibit J at 6-7.)
1.zz.  The Applicant testified and provided evidence to show that her disposable
income has dropped a considerable amount since April 2008.  The garnishment
discussed in 1.a., above, began in April 2008 and takes over $600.00 per month.  In
addition, her partner was unemployed for a considerable period in 2008, and only in
October 2008 did he begin working again.  She submitted a financial statement showing
that her disposable income was $81.42 per month as of February 2009.  (Transcript at
81-88; Applicant’s Exhibit K at 4.)
1.aaa. and 3.g.  The Applicant admitted that she had written numerous over the
years knowing that she did not have the funds to cover them.  This conduct began in
State B in the 1990s, but continued after she returned to State A, as set forth under
1.ww., 1.xx and 1.yy., above.
In discussing her conduct, the Applicant stated:
Yes.  I did write checks deliberately.  I mean, this was during the
time frame that I had moved to [State B].  I had a small - - my oldest was
very young.  I mean, I was - -I left pregnant and - - and we - - I left and
there was some Unemployment, not very much, maybe 250, if not less
than that, a week and - - ‘cause I was a part-time student or part-time
employee and a full-time student and - - and my domestic partner, my
child’s father, did not have a job at the time when we left and he was also
unemployed.  So in order to my way of  - - I was just wanting to make
ends meet and buy diapers for my child, food for my child and, you know -
- so I knew there was no funds there or not enough and I would write ‘em
out to either supermarkets - - basically, most of these were supermarkets
of all - - you know, throughout [City] really, I mean, just buying what I
8
needed as food and necessities for me and my children, so on, so - -
(Transcript at 90-91.)
As a result of her history of bad check writing, the Applicant was placed on a Bad
Check Program in State B.  She stated that, for about a year, she had to make
payments and restitution to the victims.  (Transcript at 91; Government Exhibit 5 at 8.)
The Applicant further testified that the three bad checks she wrote to her employer in
2004 were the last ones that she has written.  (Transcript at 92-93.)
1.bbb., 1.ccc. and 1.ddd.  These three allegations will be discussed under
Paragraph 2, below. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she has engaged in criminal conduct.  The Applicant admits all of
the allegations under this paragraph of the SOR.
2.a., 1.bbb. and 3.h.  The Applicant moved to State B in early 1996.  Due to
having a vehicle repossessed for non-payment, the Applicant did not have a vehicle.
She testified:
I rented a mini-van and I was making payments, it was coming out
of our credit card, but I  - - I no longer had funds or the availability to
continue paying it.  So, at that time, I kept the van for maybe over 30 days
and that’s - - and it wasn’t returned, so that’s why it was considered a
felony larceny, I guess.  (Transcript at 94.)
She was eventually arrested for this offense and required to pay restitution to the
rental car company.  The amount she paid was approximately $10,000.00.  (Transcript
at 94-95.)
2.b., 1.ccc. and 3.i.  The Applicant, also in 1996, used an intermediary to open a
bank account in the other person’s name.  The Applicant would knowingly write bad
checks on this account and withdraw money from ATM machines knowing there was
insufficient money in the account.
The Applicant was eventually arrested and charged with four counts of Forgery
and one of Fraud, all felonies.  She plead guilty and was sentenced to two years
probation, six months of financial counseling and paid restitution of at least $3,000.00.
Her probation was terminated early and the charge reduced to a misdemeanor.
(Transcript at 95-96; Government Exhibit 5 at 10, 16-17.)
2.c., 1.ddd. and 3.j.  The Applicant was arrested in 2003 for misdemeanor theft.
In this incident, she used a procurement card provided by her employer to buy personal
items.  She plead guilty and sentenced to three years informal probation, pay restitution
9
of approximately $300.00 and fined.  (Transcript at 96-97; Government Exhibit 5 at 17-
18.) 
2.d.  This subparagraph states that the incidents described in subparagraphs 3.a.
through 3.f., below, amount to criminal conduct.  Specifically, that they are cognizable
under 18 U.S.C. §1001.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she has engaged in conduct which shows questionable judgment,
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  The
Applicant admitted allegations 3.d., 3.e., 3.f., 3.g., 3.h., 3.i., and 3.j.  Those admissions
are deemed findings of fact.
3.a.  The Applicant filled out her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Purposes (e-QIP) on November 1, 2006.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  Question 27.d. asks
whether, in the last seven years, she had any judgments against her which had not
been paid.  The Applicant admitted the judgement set forth in subparagraph 1.c.  She
did not admit the three other judgments set forth in subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b., and 1.dd.
This was a false answer to a relevant question regarding the Applicant’s financial
situation.  The Applicant had no good response as to why she did not admit these
additional judgments.  Her main argument was that she knew the Government would
pull a credit report on her and then she would answer questions.  (Transcript at 97-101.)
3.b.  Question 27.d.2. of Government Exhibit 1 asks the Applicant to provide
details for the judgment set forth in subparagraph 1.c.  The Applicant stated that the
judgment had been paid.  Applicant’s Exhibit D seems to indicate that the judgment was
paid in 2008.  The Applicant testified that, in reality, this judgment was paid before 2006,
but she did not request a letter about it until 2008.  That argument, under the
circumstances of this case, is credible and worthy of belief.  (Transcript at 101-103.)
This subparagraph is found for the Applicant.
3.c.  Question 28.a. of Government Exhibit 1 asks the Applicant whether, within
the last seven years, she had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts.  She
stated, “Yes,” and discussed a vehicle loan that had been brought current.  She did not
state any of the numerous delinquent debts described under Paragraph 1, above.  This
answer was, therefore, false.  The Applicant stated that she did not have a copy of her
credit report, and did not know what kind of debts were on there.  (Transcript at 103-
104.)
3.d.  Question 28.b. of Government Exhibit 1 asks the Applicant whether she was
currently more than 90 days delinquent on any of her debts.  She did not state any of
the numerous delinquent debts described under Paragraph 1, above.  This answer was,
therefore, false.  (Transcript at 104-105.)
10
3.e.  Question 23.a. of Government Exhibit 1 asks the Applicant whether she had
ever been charged with any felony offense.  She answered, No.”  This answer was false
because the Applicant had been charged and convicted of felonies as set forth in
subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.  She testified that she had been advised by another person
in the security department to only go back seven years on her questionnaire.
(Transcript at 105-106.)
3.f.  In 2003, as stated above under subparagraph 2.c., the Applicant misused a
procurement card from her employer.  She subsequently was laid off from the job.  In
her questionnaire, Government Exhibit 1, at question 22, concerning this employment,
she states that she, “Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of
misconduct.”
The Applicant filled out interrogatories in 2008.  The Applicant described the
same incident as follows at question 11, “Due to the incident [at] [place of employment] I
wasn’t fired, it was due to the budget crisis in [State A].  If I had been fired I wouldn’t
have been able to collect unemployment.  Unemployment benefits were collected for 1
year.”  (Government Exhibit 5 at 6.)
The Applicant testified at length about this incident.  (Transcript at 106-111.)
Based on my analysis of all the available evidence, I find that the Applicant did not
intend to deceive the Government as to why she was dismissed from this job.  Her
answer on Government Exhibit 1 put the Government on notice that this was an area
that needed investigation.  This subparagraph is found for the Applicant.
Mitigation
The Applicant’s supervisor submitted a letter on her behalf.  The supervisor
states, “I have found [the Applicant] to be intelligent, capable, dedicated, and
personable woman.”  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)
The Applicant submitted her job evaluations.  They show that she “Consistently
Meets Expectations.”  (Applicant’s Exhibit B and Exhibit C.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the Administrative Judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access
to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
11
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the Administrative Judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
12
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. The Applicant, by her own admission, had over $44,512.13 in past
due debts, all of which have been due and owing for several years. The evidence is
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial difficulties arose primarily between about 1994 and 2004.  However, she only
began paying the debts in 2006, and only when her employer suggested that she do so.
While she has made strides in paying her indebtedness, the fact that she had so many
bad debts, for so long, and did nothing to pay them until a little over two years ago, is
still troubling.  This mitigating condition is not applicable to this case.  
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn . . .), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.”  The Applicant argues that many of these debts
came from unemployment or underemployment.  However, there is evidence that she
willfully ignored her responsibilities and, as described in subparagraphs 1.bbb., 1.ccc.
and 1.ddd., was not afraid to act criminally if she felt it necessary.  I cannot find, under
these particular facts, that the Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances.
The Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to pay off her creditors.  The
evidence shows that she has paid off approximately $27,149.52 of her indebtedness to
26 creditors.  She continues to owe approximately $17,362.31, to 18 creditors.  AG ¶
20(d) is arguably applicable.
AG ¶ 20(c) states that it may be mitigating where, “there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control.”  The Applicant last act of passing a
bad check occurred in 2004.  Her past due indebtedness appears to all predate 2004.
She is slowly paying her past due indebtedness.  This mitigating condition is arguably
applicable.
I have weighed the Applicant’s conduct prior to 2004 against her actions in
paying many of her accounts in the last two years.  In addition, I have looked at the
circumstances in which she allowed this conduct to occur, particularly writing bad
13
checks, opening a bank account under a false name and stealing a car because she felt
she needed to for her child.  The record evidence shows little remorse or understanding
on the part of the Applicant about why her conduct was inappropriate.  While she is
paying her debts off, and is to be commended for that, I find that it is still too soon, given
the other circumstances of this case, to find that this conduct may not recur in the
future.  Paragraph 1 is found against the Applicant.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG & 30:      
Criminal activity creates doubts about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The Applicant was involved in several criminal incidents over the years.  What is
striking about them is that they all related to financial crimes.  AG ¶ 31(a) applies to this
case, stating that a disqualifying condition is “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses.”
AG ¶ 33.(a) stated that it may be mitigating where, “so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment.”  The last criminal incident occurred in
2003, when she misused an employer’s procurement card.  However, repeatedly the
Applicant has shown a proclivity towards illegal acts when pressured financially.  I see
little indication that her personality has changed to the point that she would avoid such
conduct again.  This mitigating condition is not applicable.
I find little, if any, remorse or understanding of what she did, and why it is wrong.
AG ¶ 33.(d) is not currently applicable.  Under the particular circumstances of this case,
at this point in time, using the clearly consistent standard, I must find this paragraph
against the Applicant.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG & 15:      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
14
AG ¶ 16(a) states that it may be disqualifying where an Applicant engages in the
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.”  
The Applicant’s e-QIP is riddled with false and misleading answers.  She argues
that it was either the result of her taking bad advice (that she only had to go back seven
years on her questionnaire) or that she did not have all the information (not telling the
Government that she had over 30 bad debts).  The Applicant works in the security
department, and knew or should have known that her answers were, at the very least,
misleading.  Under other circumstances, the Applicant’s false answers could have been
seen as mistakes.  However, the Applicant has little credibility.  As shown above, she is
not adverse to using fraud or theft to her advantage.  None of the mitigating conditions
apply.  Based on the record, I find the Applicant intentionally falsified her answers as set
forth in subparagraphs 3.a., 3.c., 3.d., and 3.e.  
Subparagraphs 3.g., 3.h., 3.i., and 3.j., state that conduct of the Applicant which
is specifically discussed under Paragraphs 1 and 2, above, are also cognizable under
this paragraph.  The personal conduct described here is sufficient to justify denial of
security clearance under this paragraph as well.  AG ¶ 16.(c) applies: 
Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
Based on all of the information set forth above, Paragraph 3 is found against the
Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
15
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), all of the
Applicant’s conduct, financial, criminal, and personal, is frequent and relatively recent.
Based on the state of the record, I cannot find that there have been permanent
behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).  Accordingly, at the present time, I cannot find
that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶
2(a)(8)), or that the likelihood of recurrence is close to nil (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and/or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude the Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her
Financial Considerations, Criminal Conduct and Personal Conduct.  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing her request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly,
the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the Government's
Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q.: Against the Applicant
16
Subparagraph 1.r.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.w.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.y.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.z.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.aa.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.bb.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.cc.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.dd.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ee.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ff..: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.gg.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.hh.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ii.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.jj.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.kk.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ll.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.mm.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.nn.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.oo.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.pp.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.qq.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.rr.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ss.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.tt.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.uu.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.vv.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ww.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.xx.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.yy.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.zz.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.aaa.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.bbb.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ccc.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ddd.: Against the Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.: Against the Applicant
17
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.e.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.f.: For the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
