                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-08413
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
April 21, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on May 5, 2008.  On November 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 21, 2008.  He
answered the SOR in writing soon thereafter, and requested an Administrative
Determination by an Administrative Judge.  Department Counsel issued a File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on January 26, 2009.  The Applicant did not to respond to
the FORM.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his undated Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Paragraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.e~1.n, 1.p. and 1.r. of the SOR, with explanations.  He denied
the factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.o. and 1.q. of the SOR.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The Applicant incurred “just about” all of his past due indebtedness from
marriages with his “1  & 2  ex wife(sic)” (Item 4 at page 4).  As a result, there are 18st nd
alleged past due debts.
1.a.  The first debt is for a car loan in the amount of about $10,289 (Item 7 at
page 1).  The Applicant denies this past due debt, averring that his “ex wife got [it] in
[their] divorce” (Item 4 at page 1).  As the creditor was not a party to Applicant’s divorce,
it is not bound by the terms of that divorce.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.b.  The second debt is a medical bill in the amount of about $192 (Item 7 at
page 1).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.c.  The third debt is a wireless phone bill in the amount of about $439 (Item 7 at
page 1).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.d.  The fourth debt is another medical bill in the amount of about $64 (Item 7 at
page 2).  The Applicant denies this past due debt, averring that he is “not sure” about
this debt, but offers nothing further (Item 4 at page 2).  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.e.  The fifth debt is creditor E in the amount of about $184 (Item 7 at page 2).
The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.f.  The sixth debt is a third medical bill in the amount of about $1,469 (Item 7 at
page 2).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.g.  The seventh debt is a credit card bill in the amount of about $2,021 (Item 7
at page 2).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.h.  The eighth debt is another credit card bill in the amount of about $2,680
(Item 7 at page 2).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still
owing.
1.i.  The ninth debt is to a credit union in the amount of about $187 (Item 7 at
page 2).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.j.  The tenth debt is a cable TV bill in the amount of about $192 (Item 7 at page
2).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.k.  The eleventh debt is another wireless phone bill in the amount of about
$603 (Item 7 at page 2).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is
still owing.
3
1.l.  The twelfth debt is for another car loan in the amount of about $9,512 (Item 7
at page 2).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.m.  The thirteenth debt is to creditor M in the amount of about $683 (Item 8 at
page 4).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.n.  The fourteenth debt is gas credit card bill in the amount of about $666 (Item
8 at page 6).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.o.  The fifteenth debt is for a fourth medical bill in the amount of about $34,493
(Item 8 at page 9).  The Applicant denies this past due debt, again averring that his “ex
wife got [it] in [their] divorce” (Item 4 at page 2).  As the creditor was not a party to
Applicant’s divorce, it is not bound by the terms of that divorce.  I find that this debt is
still owing.
1.p.  The sixteenth debt is to a bank in the amount of about $7,516 (Item 8 at
page 9).  The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.q.  The seventeenth debt is to creditor Q in the amount of about $8,947 (Item 8
at page 10).  The Applicant denies this past due debt, averring that his “ex wife got [it] in
[their] divorce” (Item 4 at page 3).  As the creditor was not a party to Applicant’s divorce,
it is not bound by the terms of that divorce.  I find that this debt is still owing.
1.r.  The final debt is a utility bill in the amount of about $406 (Item 8 at page 11).
The Applicant admits this past due debt.  I find that this debt is still owing.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the Applicant is responsible “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The Applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
AG Subparagraph19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Subparagraph 20(b), it may be
mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., . . . divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.@  As noted above, the Applicant attributes his
financial difficulties to two prior divorces, but he has done nothing to address his
substantial past due indebtedness.  As such, I can find no countervailing mitigating
conditions that are applicable.
5
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG Subparagraph 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Here, the Applicant has offered nothing to demonstrate that he is addressing any
of his past due debts.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his
Financial Considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
RICHARD A. CEFOLA
Administrative Judge
