                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02694 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on August 1, 2007 (Item 3).  On November 20, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F (Item 1).  The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 17, 2008, admitting 14 and 
denying five of the 19 allegations in the SOR (Items 2).  She elected to have the matter 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on February 10, 2009.  Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on February 23, 2009, and was provided the opportunity to 
file objections, and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions.  Applicant did not respond to the FORM or provide additional material.  The 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
case was assigned to me on April 27, 2009.  Based on a review of the case file and 
pleadings, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file, and the pleadings.  I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 39 years old and has been employed as a data processing specialist 
for a defense contractor since July 2007.  She is married with two children.  This 
appears to be her first request for a security clearance (Item 3).  There is no information 
in the file concerning salary, expenses, or disposable funds.  She reports steady 
employment since February 2000, except for a five month period when she was 
unemployed to take care of her mother (Item 3)  
 
Credit reports and the SOR list the following delinquent debts: a charged off 
account with First Premier for $463 (SOR 1.a); an account in collection for Arrow 
Services for $339 (SOR 1.b); a charged off account for Capital One for $2,017 (SOR 
1.c); a collection account for AT&T by Palisades for $258 (SOR 1.d); a charged off 
account for Swiss Colony for $85 (SOR 1.e); a collection account for Verizon for $701 
(SOR 1.f); a Verizon account in collection for $638 (SOR 1.g); a medical account in 
collection for $90 (SOR 1.h); an account for Bank of American in collection by NCO 
Financial for $253 (SOR 1.i); a charged off account for First Premier for $267 (SOR 1.j); 
a charged off account for Triadfincl for $8,123 (SOR 1.k); a medical collection account 
for $28 (SOR 1.l); a charged off account for HSBC for $759 (SOR1.m); a mortgage 
foreclosure debt of $2,300 for AMC Mrtg Services (SOR 1.n); medical accounts in 
collection for $39 (SOR 1.o), $35 (SOR 1.p), $29 (SOR 1.q), and $741 (SOR 1.r); and a 
collection account for Bank America by NCO Financial for $279 (SOR 1.s; See Item 1, 
SOR; Item 4, Credit Report, dated September 1, 2008; and Item 5, Credit Report, dated 
August 15, 2007).  It appears the two First Premier accounts (SOR 1.a and 1.j) are the 
same debt.  It appears the two collection accounts for Bank of America (SOR 1.i and 
1.s) are the same accounts.  It appears the collection accounts for Verizon (SOR 1.f and 
1.g) are the same debt.  The total debt, without the duplications, is for 16 debts totaling 
$16,207. 
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, 
1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s.  She provided no explanation for the 
debts or any action she has taken to pay the debts.  She denied the debts at SOR 1.b, 
1.c, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.n.  The only explanation provided was that she was unaware of the 
debt (Item 2).   
 
In response to interrogatories, Applicant stated she never ordered any item or 
made a purchase from the mail order house listed at SOR 1.e.  She presented no 
information on any correspondence she had with the company concerning the debt.  
She also stated she intends to file a petition in bankruptcy but the filing has been 
delayed.  She realizes her credit reports show a negative financial history, but she is not 
 
3 
 
 
a worthless person but trusting, hardworking and reliable.  Her credit report does not 
reflect her true worth.  She would never do anything to harm her country (Items 6 and 7, 
Answers to Interrogatories).   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18)  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  Applicant’s delinquent debts as established by credit reports and 
Applicant's admissions to most of the debts raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC 
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  The record from credit 
reports and responses to interrogatories shows her inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts and shows a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment).  Applicant has taken no action to 
pay the delinquent debts, so the debts are current.  The debts are from various sources, 
credit cards, loans, phone bills, and a mortgage, so they are not infrequent.  Since the 
debts are current and not paid, they cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  The mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).  Applicant admits to 14 of the 19 
debts without an explanation.  Of the five she denied, she only states that she was 
unaware of the debts.  Applicant has been steadily employed for the last nine years 
except for five months.  She presented no information concerning any attempt to pay 
past due obligations when she has been steadily employed.  She has not established 
she acted responsibly in managing her finances and making payments on her 
obligations. 
 
5 
 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) "the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts".  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant presented no information to show she has a plan to pay the debts or any 
action that she has taken to pay her debts.  Applicant appears to have sufficient income 
to make some payments on her delinquent debts since she has been steadily employed 
for over nine years.  She has not presented a concrete plan to pay her delinquent debts 
or established any attempt to pay them.  While bankruptcy is a legal and permissible 
means of resolving financial issues, a future intention to file a bankruptcy is not an 
indication of a good-faith effort to pay debts.  Applicant has not presented sufficient 
information to indicate a good-faith effort to pay creditors or resolve debts.  Her finances 
are not under control and she has not acted responsibly.  She has not presented 
sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations. 
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 Applicant has not taken action to resolve her past due debts.  Her indifferent 
attitude, her failure to contact creditors, and her lack of actions show she is not 
trustworthy, responsible, or that she exercises good judgment.  Applicant has been 
irresponsible towards her delinquent debts and financial obligations.  This is an 
indication that she might be irresponsible towards the protection and handling of 
classified information.  I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from her finances.  Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant (Duplicate) 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant (Duplicate) 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant (Duplicate) 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
