1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )         ISCR Case No. 08-10822
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA) on May 18, 2007.
On January 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations
(Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1,
2006.
 Earlier in the hearing, AE I was not admitted in evidence on relevancy grounds. After a careful examination1
of the exhibit, the testimony and other documents related to the exhibit, I reversed my ruling (Tr. 71), finding
the exhibit to be relevant to the status of delinquent debts identified in SOR 1.a. and 1.b.
2
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on January 30, 2009. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on March 3, 2009 for a hearing on March 24, 2009. At the hearing,
four exhibits (GE I through 4) were admitted in evidence without objection to support the
government's case. Applicant testified and submitted nine exhibits (AE A-AE I).  In the1
time allowed for him to furnish additional documentation, he submitted AE J through O.
DOHA received the transcript on April 10, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 50 years old and married. Applicant has one child from his current
marriage and four children from a previous marriage. He served in the United States
Navy from June 1977 to June 1997, receiving an honorable discharge (AE J). He has
worked as a field service representative with his current employer since October 2006.
He seeks a security clearance. He has held a security clearance for about 32 years. In
his SCA (GE 2), Applicant listed all six debts identified in the SOR.
The SOR has six allegations under the financial considerations guideline, totaling
more than $16,000. The debts became delinquent in 2004 and 2005 (GE 3, 4). In his
answer, he denied SOR 1.a. and 1.b., claiming both accounts were settled. The two
accounts have been forgiven and are subject to a claims procedure by a receiver for the
state court. The law firm handling the two accounts went into receivership, and
Applicant is trying to recover his payments from a receiver. Applicant essentially
acknowledged by implication he owed SOR 1.c., 1.d., and 1.f., until he settled the
accounts in January 2009. Regarding SOR 1.e., Applicant indicates he tried to settle the
account but the creditor would not oblige. 
SOR 1.a. ($1,325), 1.b. ($2,322). The last activity on the SOR 1.a. account was
in August 2005. The last activity of the SOR 1.b. account was in July 2004. On October
22, 2008, the state court entered a settlement agreement between the SOR 1.a./1.b.
creditor and the receiver on behalf of the receivership entities (including law firm where
Applicant had been making payments) and about 20,000 customers. Under the terms of
the settlement, the SOR 1.a/1.b. creditor agreed to forgive all amounts owed, and to
request the credit agencies remove the entries from the credit reports of each customer.
The receiver advised customers that they would have to file a claim for the return of
payments made to the receivership entities. On November 25, 2008, Applicant filed a
proof of claim to the receiver (GE 2). As of March 21, 2009, no final decision had been
made regarding Applicant’s claim of $3,296. Projected payments of claims were
delayed from the original date of April 2009 to December 2009 (AE I).
SOR 1.c. ($1,758). The last activity on this account was in August 2005. The
account was settled in January 2009 (AE A). 
 No additional information was provided. It should be noted that Applicant did not begin receiving his military2
retirement ($600) until about 2007. See, DD 214 (AE J).
3
SOR 1.d. ($565). The discount department store account was settled in late
February or early March 2009 (AE H, M).
SOR 1.e. ($10,686). The account became delinquent in June 2004. Applicant
indicates he attempted to work out a settlement with the creditor on many occasions.
The creditor, according to Applicant, chose to write the account off, and submit pertinent
tax forms to Applicant (AE N).
SOR 1.f. ($3,184). The account became delinquent on June 2004. Applicant was
notified on February 20, 2009 that his payments of $1,931 were sufficient to settle the
account (AE F).
Applicant provided two principal explanations for his inability to pay the
delinquent creditors in 2004 and 2005. He referred to AE B (Social Security Earnings
statement) to show his earnings went from about $76,000 in 2003 to $53,000 in 2005;
his earnings returned to approximately $67,000 for 2007. Applicant has never
encountered any periods of unemployment (Tr. 35-36).
Applicant’s second reason for not paying his delinquent debts is related to a state
judge located in the midwestern United States. Applicant testified:
[A]nd my child support was also supposed to be reduced by one-quarter of
the total of $600 when my first son graduated, which happened in 2005.
The judge at that time refused to reduce the child support stating that I
was currently paying less than the state of [midwestern state] mandated
and he would not entertain reducing the child support. If I wished him to
consider further, I would not be happy with the outcome (Tr. 40).  2
Between 2004 and 2008, Applicant attempted to resolve his financial problems
by enrolling in a debt settlement service in June 2004. Applicant avers he paid $250 a
month for six months, but discontinued his enrollment when the creditors continue to
harass him (Tr. 34). Other than AE C (the contract signed by Applicant), there is no
evidence to show where the payments went.
To keep expenses down, Applicant indicated that the family did not dine out (Tr.
39). Also, with the objective of keeping expenses down, Applicant remained at home to
care for their child while his wife worked at a local outlet of a national discount store (Tr.
38). 
Attached to Applicant’s answers to interrogatories (GE 2) is a personal financial
statement (PFS, December 2008) showing that Applicant’s net monthly income is
$5,536. Subtracting his expenses and debts from the net monthly income leaves a
monthly remainder of $1,994 (Id.) Applicant testified he was using the monthly
4
remainder to pay down his four current credit cards (Tr. 47-49). AE 3 (credit report
dated October 27, 2008) shows that Applicant has no other accounts falling delinquent
after 2005.
During the hearing, Applicant indicated he opened a signature loan for $5,000 in
January 2009. He used the loan to settle the delinquent accounts identified in SOR 1.c.,
1.d., and 1.f. (Tr. 64). 
Character Evidence
Applicant’s military performance evaluation for 1996 was above standards (AE
K). In his performance  evaluation for 2007 and 2008, Applicant exceeded expectations
of his supervisors (AE L). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant's eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge's ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the "whole person
concept." The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are sensible, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.l.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.l.l5, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
5
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
¶18. The Concern. "Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts."
FC disqualifying condition (DC) ¶19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts)
and FC DC ¶19.c. (a history not meeting financial obligations) are applicable to the
circumstances of this case. Applicant has been unable to pay more than $16,000 in
delinquent debt to six creditors. The four to five-year period of delinquency of each of
the debts demonstrates a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Evidence of financial problems may be mitigated by FC mitigating condition (MC)
¶20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment). This condition applies in part as
Applicant has settled with five of six creditors, even though he has created new debt
(the $5,000 loan) to pay off old debt. 
FC MC ¶20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control and individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
may apply in those circumstances where events outside the person's control contributed
to the financial difficulty. Applicant’s loss of some income in 2004 is self-explanatory.
But, his earnings improved within a short period of time. In addition, his wife was
working too. On balance, his declining income claim is not persuasive. 
Applicant’s $600-child support obligation to his children from his first marriage is
a more persuasive reason for his inability to pay his delinquent accounts. The child
support ended in 2007, giving Applicant a chance to turn his attention to his delinquent
debts. Applicant’s enrollment in the debt firm in 2007, and his settlement of three
6
additional creditors in January 2009, afford Applicant some mitigation under both prongs
of FC MC ¶20.b. 
FC MC ¶20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
is applicable although Applicant has had very little financial counseling. He exercised
good judgment in seeking financial assistance through the two debt settlement
organizations. His efforts have resulted in  the settlement of five of the six listed
creditors. 
Applicant also receives some credit under FC MC ¶20.d. (the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) for the
successful resolution of five of six creditors, notwithstanding the fact he has increased
his debt by 500%. Given Applicant’s favorable job performance evidence and success
in settling with five of six creditors, I am confidant Applicant will continue to work out a
resolution for the account in SOR 1.e. Accordingly, I find for Applicant under the FC
guideline.  
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
I have examined the evidence with the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
my ultimate finding for Applicant under the FC guideline. I have also weighed the
circumstances within the context of nine variables known as the whole person concept.
In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following factors:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. AG ¶ 2(a)
I have considered the disqualifying and mitigation conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding the case. Applicant was in the United States Navy
for 20 years. He received an honorable discharge in June 1997. He has held a security
clearance since 1977. The credit reports show that six debts became delinquent in 2004
and 2005. To Applicant’s credit, the reports also show no additional delinquent debt
after 2005. He signed on with the first debt settlement plan in 2004, but stopped his
affiliation when the creditors continued to call. In 2007, Applicant enrolled in another
debt settlement service that encountered financial problems in October 2008. Given
Applicant’s net monthly remainder of almost $2,000 in December 2008, he could have
saved three or four months and paid the delinquent accounts in SOR 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f.
However, Applicant testified he has been using the remainder to pay down his four
other creditors. I find his testimony credible. 
7
Judging by the totality of the circumstances, Applicant exercised poor judgment
in not addressing the delinquent accounts at an earlier point in time. He compounded
his poor judgment by taking out a loan when a better choice was available through his
monthly, discretionary income. On the other hand, Applicant provided documented
evidence that he was addressing two of the listed delinquent accounts in 2004 and
definitely in 2007, a long time before he received the SOR. For this reason, I find for him
under the FC guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                      
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
