 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07286 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to a different judge on 
May 22, 2015. It was reassigned to me on June 5, 2015. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 12, 2015, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on July 14, 2015. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
(GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but 
did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 22, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. The admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
this employer since 2011. She has a high school diploma and has taken some college 
courses. She has no military service, but she has held a security clearance since 2007. 
She is single and has no children.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately $20,615. The debts 
were listed in credit reports from March 2012, February 2014, June 2014, and March 
2015.2  
 
 Applicant admitted during her security clearance interview and during her hearing 
testimony that her delinquent debts were caused by her own mismanagement. Most of 
the debts arose from her abuse of credit cards. She contacted a credit management 
company in about 2011 about consolidating her debts and making a single payment. 
She stated she made a few payments, but became too overwhelmed and stopped 
making further payments. She did not present documentation regarding what payments 
were made. She has not sought any other credit counseling since then.3  
 
 She contacted three attorneys about the possibility of filing bankruptcy. The first 
attorney took her retainer and went out of business. The second and third attorneys told 
her that she would only qualify for a Chapter 13 (wage earner plan) and not a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy because of her income. She was not prepared to commit to five years of 
payments under a Chapter 13 plan and did not pursue bankruptcy any further. She 
stopped contact with her creditors when she contacted the attorneys and she has not 
resumed contact with them. All the SOR debts remain unresolved and she has no plan 
to address them.4    
 
 Applicant stated that she has about $960 of discretionary income at the end of 
the month after paying all current expenses. She uses this money to help relatives who 
are unemployed. She is current on her car payment. She lives with her parents and 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 19, 24; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-23; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 20, 30, 32, 34; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
pays monthly rent of $200. Her checking account has a typical balance of about $300. 
She has no savings or retirement accounts.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 25-29. 
 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. She has not addressed any of the debts and they 
all remain unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant admitted that her debts were caused by her own financial 
mismanagement. This is not a condition beyond her control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable. Applicant sought financial counseling and advice from attorneys about filing 
bankruptcy, but in the end decided to do nothing toward resolving her debts. Given the 
unpaid status of the SOR debts, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the 
remaining debts is lacking. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies, but ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
Applicant did not dispute any of the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted. However, I 
also considered that she has done nothing to resolve her financial situation. She has not 
established a meaningful track record of financial responsibility.  
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
