 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07817 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on January 9, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
June 12, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 14, 2015. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted 
into the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 23, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. The admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
defense contractors since December 1999. He also works part-time for a retail 
company. He is single with no children. He resides with his girlfriend. He has no military 
service. He holds a top secret security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts including a past-due mortgage account in 
the amount of $14,694, with an outstanding loan balance of $91,173 (SOR ¶ 1.a); a 
collection account on a second mortgage in the amount of $64,784 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and 
two collection accounts to a property management company in the amounts of $4,549 
and $4,708 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). The debts were listed in credit reports from March 
2012 and July 2014.2  
 
 In about 2006, Applicant purchased four investment properties, two 
condominiums located in state A, one loft in state B, and a home located in state C. He 
bought the properties on the advice of a childhood friend who was in the real estate 
business. The plan was to rent the properties and hold them until they increased in 
value and then sell them at a profit. The rental income would be used to pay the 
mortgages. His friend helped him obtain the various loans to finance the purchase of 
these properties. He also obtained second mortgages on the two properties in state A. 
He rented the properties, but the rent was insufficient to cover the mortgage payments. 
He used his savings and other income to make all his payments for as long as he could. 
By 2009, he was unable to make the payments and the properties went into foreclosure. 
The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were both second mortgages, one 
in state A and one in state B. He has not received any IRS Forms 1099-C (cancellation 
of debt) for any of the debts. He has not been sued for any deficiencies or nonpayment. 
These debts are not resolved.3  
 The SOR debts at ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are both for amounts Applicant owed to a 
property management company he used for the investment properties. He has not 
contacted the creditor and these debts are unresolved.4    
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 26, 28, 55, 64; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 29-37, 39, 41, 43, 65-66; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 34, 75; GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s current financial state is that he owes his own home, but is currently 
two months behind on the mortgage payment. He is up-to-date on his taxes. According 
to a recent personal financial worksheet, he is left with approximately $745 of monthly 
discretionary income. He does not have any savings and has about $400 in his 
checking account. He has several small balances on some investment accounts after 
he used them to pay the investment property mortgages. He provided documentation 
showing that he settled two delinquent credit card debts in 2010. He has not obtained 
financial counseling.5 
 
 Applicant is a highly regarded employee. He presented 10 character letters from 
supervisors and coworkers who describe him as a trustworthy, dedicated, honest, loyal, 
and hardworking employee. He suffered a heart attack about one year ago, but returned 
to work with minimal loss of time.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 47, 52, 72, 76; GE 2; AE B-C. 
 
6 Tr. at 63; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has four delinquent past-due or collection accounts that remain unpaid. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
All of the delinquent debts are related to Applicant’s failed investment venture. 
He invested in four properties in three different states hoping to profit by selling them 
after his equity increased. Things did not go according to plan and after depleting his 
savings and investment accounts all the properties were foreclosed. Applicant’s 
decision to invest in these properties was not a circumstance beyond his control. AG ¶ 
20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not participate in any financial counseling. Although he presented 
evidence that he settled two non-SOR debts, there are no clear indications that his SOR 
debts are being resolved, nor was there evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve 
the debts.7 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 Applicant did not contest any debts so AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. At this point, 
Applicant’s finances remain a concern. 
 
                                                          
7 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the predecessor mitigating condition to AG ¶ 20(d)], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [AG ¶ 20(d)].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted. I also 
considered that he is a valuable employee to his employers. However, Applicant has 
made little effort to resolve his financial situation. He has not established a meaningful 
track record of debt management.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraphs:   1.a – 1.d: Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
