 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09816 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 20, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on August 17, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on September 28, 2015. As of November 6, 2015, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on November 10, 2015. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2004. He is a high school graduate. On his April 2012 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), he reported that he was married 
for the second time and that he had four children and three stepchildren.1   
 
The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling $25,310. Applicant admitted 
owing all the debts. Credit reports from May 2012 and October 2014 also substantiate 
the debts.2   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $23,260 charged-off balance on a loan for a trailer home 
Applicant purchased for his mother. Applicant bought and financed the trailer, but his 
mother was supposed to make the payments. She was unable to maintain the 
payments. Applicant listed the debt on his 2012 SF 86. He wrote that he contacted the 
creditor “to resolve the issue and they advised [him] not to pay anything.” He reported 
during his background interview in June 2012 that he contacted the creditor to make 
payment arrangements, but because the account was so far in arrears, he could not 
afford to bring the account up to date. In his response to the SOR, he wrote that on 
“July 15, 2015, [he] agreed to a monthly payment arrangement in the amount of $100 
due on the 10th of each month.”3  
 
Applicant bought a ring for his wife from a jewelry store as an anniversary 
present. The purchase was financed through the jewelry store. The 2012 credit report 
listed the charged-off account as opened in 2008, with a date of last action of June 
2010. It reported the account as $1,275 past due with a $2,734 balance. The 2014 
credit report listed the account as charged off, with a date of last action of June 2010. It 
reported the account as $1,275 past due with a $2,013 balance, which is the amount 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.4  
 
Applicant reported during his background interview in June 2012 that he was in 
the process of making payment arrangements to the jewelry store, and he would pay 
the account in full as soon as possible. In his response to the SOR, he wrote that the 
balance on the debt was $4,859 including interest.5 He further wrote: 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Items 1, 3-5.  
 
3 Items 1-5. 
 
4 Items 1, 3-5. 
 
5 Items 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
On July 15, 2015, [the jewelry store] accepted my offer to settle this debt 
in the amount of $3,000. The payment arrangement has been set up to 
withdrawal from my checking account on Tuesday July 28, 2015.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $37 debt to a satellite television company. The debt is listed 
on the 2012 credit report, but not the 2014 credit report. Applicant contacted the 
collection company and the satellite television company. He was told the debt was 
satisfied and closed.7 
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so it is unknown if he made the $100 
monthly payments toward the trailer loan or if he paid the $3,000 settlement amount to 
the jewelry store. Those two accounts are the only past-due accounts with balances on 
his 2014 credit report. That credit report listed an auto loan that was opened in October 
2013, with a high credit of $22,263 and a monthly payment of $414. It listed a second 
auto loan that was opened in August 2014, with a high credit of $37,619 and a monthly 
payment of $636.8     
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
6 Item 1. 
 
7 Items 1, 3-5. 
 
8 Item 5. 
 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  The $37 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is apparently resolved. That allegation is 
concluded for Applicant. His mother was unable to maintain the payments on the trailer 
home that he purchased for her. He recently agreed to pay the debt, but he did not 
submit evidence that he made any payments. Applicant reported during his background 
interview in June 2012 that he was in the process of making payment arrangements for 
the jewelry-store debt, and he would pay the account in full as soon as possible. While 
that debt languished for three years, he financed two auto loans with combined monthly 
payments of $1,050. He stated that he agreed to settle the jewelry-store debt for 
$3,000, but he did not establish that he made that payment.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the above mitigating 
conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
