 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-08437 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a public trust position to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleges he is past due on his student loan, has ten delinquent charged-off and 
collection accounts, and has unpaid Federal and state income taxes due. Applicant 
failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his finances. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On January 21, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued an SOR detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
financial considerations. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant a public trust position.  
 
On February 6, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated August 4, 2015. The FORM contained six attachments (Items).  
 
On August 13, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He was informed he could submit any material he 
wished to be considered. His response was due September 12, 2015. No material was 
received. On October 13, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied owing three collection accounts 
totaling approximately $2,700 and denied having failed to file federal and state income 
tax returns for two years. He did admit having three charged-off and four collection 
accounts. He also admitted he had not filed and owed federal and state income tax for 
2008. He asserted, but failed to provide documentation, that he had arranged 
repayment agreements with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the state franchise 
tax board. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old first alarm dispatcher who has worked for a defense 
contractor since July 2011 and seeks to obtain access to classified information. (Item 3) 
From September 1977 through August 1983, he honorably served in the U.S. Navy. 
(Item 3, 6) Applicant provided no information about his duty performance and provided 
no character reference letters.  
 
 The delinquent SOR obligations appear on Applicant’s September 2014 credit 
report, as do the three SOR debts he denied in his SOR answer. (Item 5) In Applicant’s 
February 2012 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he 
indicated he failed to pay his 2008, 2009, and 2010 Federal and state income taxes and 
estimated he owed approximately $29,000. (Item 3) He indicated in a March 2012 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) that he had begun a dialogue with an IRS 
representative to pay his past due taxes. (Item 6) In mid-2012, he had received a letter 
from the IRS regarding the filing of his 2008 federal taxes. (Item 6) In 2009, 2010, and 
2011, he was contacted by the state franchise tax board concerning his unpaid state 
taxes. In his PSI, he indicated he had finished his paperwork related to his federal tax 
returns, but intended to first make an appointment with a tax attorney to determine the 
next step in making payments. (Item 6) 
 
 In late 2011, Applicant asserted he had entered into a repayment agreement with 
the state franchise tax board to pay $92 monthly to address $1,800 in state taxes due 
 
3 
for tax years 2008 and 2009. (Item 6) He asserted that in June 2012 he intended to start 
making payments to address the $900 in state tax owed for tax year 2010. He provided 
no documentation of repayment agreements with the IRS or the state franchise tax 
board and no documentation showing pay in accord with a repayment agreement.   
 
 The only explanation for Applicant’s failure to timely file his income tax returns 
was that he was self-employed as a travel agent2 and was not a good business man. 
He did not provide any information as to how and why the charged-off and collection 
accounts became delinquent. Absent documentary evidence of payment, the 
Government argued, he failed to mitigate the concern.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
2 Applicant was a self-employed travel agent from April 2007 through December 2011. (Item 3) 
 
4 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns in a timely 
manner. He asserted, but failed to document, that he filed and paid two of the three 
years of income taxes he owed. He is also past due on his student loans, and has 
unpaid charged-off and collection accounts, which total more than $15,000. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of 
the same” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The delinquent obligations are on his credit reports, including the three he denied 
in his SOR response. There is no evidence he has paid any of his delinquent 
obligations.  
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been 
employed with his current employer since July 2011. In March 2012, he was made 
aware of the Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. He indicated he 
intended to pay his debts and had a repayment plan to address his Federal and state 
tax debts. He provided no documentation showing payment on his debts. By failing to 
document the payment of delinquent debts he has failed to act responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
6 
 
 In January 2015, Applicant, in responding to the SOR, stated he had agreements 
to repay his delinquent taxes. In August 2015, he received the FORM and informed he 
could submit documentation as to the status of his delinquent accounts. No documents 
were received. 
 
 Applicant was given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies. 
Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He provided no 
evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. He has not demonstrated that 
his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring them under 
control. The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(c) do not apply. There is no showing 
of a good-faith effort to satisfy debts or a showing that payments have been made in 
accord with a repayment agreement. The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(d) do 
not apply because Applicant has failed to document payment on his taxes or other 
delinquent obligations.    
 
Applicant provided no information as to how and why the delinquent debts 
occurred. His only explanation for failing to timely file and pay his state and Federal 
income tax was that he was not a very good business person. There is no evidence 
showing factors beyond his control. AG & 20(b) does not apply. The mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant must not only dispute the 
obligations, but must also provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. He failed to do this.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on his delinquent accounts. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since his March 2012 interview, which was 
reinforced by the January 2015 SOR, and August 2015 FORM. There is no 
documentation of payment.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. He failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past 
efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such information, and by 
relying solely on scant explanation in his response to the SOR, he failed to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts are paid—it is whether his 
financial circumstances raise concerns about eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. (See AG & 2 (a)(1).)  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to be eligible for a 
public trust position. The determination of an individual’s eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the 
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s 
current circumstances, a clearance is not recommended. In the future, if Applicant has 
paid his delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or 
otherwise substantially addressed his past-due obligations, he may well demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security worthiness.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his 
financial problems.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
