 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-07347 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign preference trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference. The action was taken 
under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On February 5, 2015, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and she 
elected to have his case decided on the written record. On August 6, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and it was received on August 17, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
 
2 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant had no objections to the Government documents that were marked as Items 3 
and 4, and are admitted into evidence. There was no objection to Applicant’s response 
to the FORM, and it is marked as Item 5, and admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on October 14, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. She was born in Bulgaria. She married a Bulgarian 
citizen in 2001, and they came to the United States later the same year. They have a 
six-year-old child born in the United States. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in February 
2011. She has been employed with the same government contractor since 2001, but 
has held different positions within the company.1 
 
 In September 2010, prior to becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant renewed her 
Bulgarian passport. She used her Bulgarian passport in December 2011 to travel to 
Mexico. In April 2012, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator as part of 
her background investigation. She indicated to the investigator that she was in 
possession of a Bulgarian passport that was obtained prior to her becoming a U.S. 
citizen. She indicated she would not use the Bulgarian passport for foreign travel and 
would surrender it if it was necessary.2 As a U.S. citizen, she used her Bulgarian 
passport to travel to Bulgaria in June through August 2012 and June through August 
2014, a direct contradiction of her statement. In addition, during her interview she 
indicated that she was not willing to renounce her Bulgarian citizenship at the time 
because her family still lived there and she wanted to ensure she would be permitted to 
visit them. She indicated she would be willing to renounce her Bulgarian citizenship in 
the future.3  
  
 In response to interrogatories from August 2014, Applicant disclosed that her 
Bulgarian passport would expire on September 23, 2015, and also provided the dates 
she used her Bulgarian passport to travel after becoming a U.S. citizen. She explained 
she intended to retain the Bulgarian passport until her Bulgarian citizenship is no longer 
personally advantageous. She noted that she was willing to surrender the passport, but 
not immediately. She intended to do so before its expiration date. She indicated she 
was retaining the passport at that time because she was still a Bulgarian citizen, all of 
her family still lived in Bulgaria, and it was advantageous. In the interrogatories, she 
also indicated she did not intend on renewing her Bulgarian passport. As part of her 
interrogatories, she was asked to make any changes to the summary of her personal 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
subject interview from April 2012. She wrote: “At the time of my interview, my intention 
was to invalidate my Bulgarian passport. However, due to the nature of the border 
operations in Bulgaria, it became obvious that the use of my Bulgarian passport in 
conjunction with my U.S. passport was personally advantageous to me.”4 She further 
stated that she had lived and worked in the United States for over 12 years. She stated 
that she was trustworthy, a valued asset to the company, and that her foreign ties have 
not and will not compromise her loyalty and dedication to her employer, clients, and the 
U.S. Government.5  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she stated that her Bulgarian passport 
expired on September 23, 2015. She did not renew it and sent it to Bulgaria 90 days 
before it expired so as not to be charged fees. She stated she did not intend to apply for 
a new or reissued Bulgarian passport. She agreed to notify her facility security officer 
prior to any overseas travel and upon return from any overseas travel. She agreed to 
allow the U.S. Government to search her non-domestic travel documents.6 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for  
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the trustworthiness concern involving foreign preference is as 
follows: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport . . . . 
Applicant held a Bulgarian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and used it to 
travel to Bulgaria and Mexico. I find her actions of possessing a current foreign passport 
falls within the above disqualifying condition.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and the following 
is potentially applicable: 
 
 
5 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
 
Applicant’s Bulgarian passport has expired. She stated she returned it to 
Bulgaria. She stated that she does not intend to renew or reapply for a Bulgarian 
passport and that she will advise her facility security officer of any foreign travel. I was 
unable to make a credibility determination. Applicant previously told a government 
investigator that she would not use her Bulgarian passport to travel and then used it on 
two separate occasions because it was advantageous. She stated that she still 
considers herself a citizen of Bulgaria. Applicant stated she was not willing to renounce 
her Bulgarian citizenship at the time, but would be willing in the future. AG ¶ 11(e) 
applies because the passport has expired. AG ¶ 11(b) applies because she expressed 
a willingness to renounce her dual citizenship in the future. Although these mitigating 
conditions apply, based on Applicant’s statements that she is a Bulgarian citizen; 
retention and use of her Bulgarian passport subsequent to advising a Government 
investigator that she would not use it; using it on two occasions, the most recent in 
August 2014; and using it because it was advantageous, I find there is insufficient 
evidence to overcome the foreign preference concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
6 
 Applicant is 37 years old and has lived in the United States since 2001. She used 
her Bulgarian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen, and after advising a Government 
investigator that she would not use it. She indicated she is still a Bulgarian citizen. She 
clearly indicated she was using her Bulgarian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen 
because it was advantageous to her, indicating a potential preference for Bulgaria over 
the United States. She used her Bulgarian passport as recent as August 2014. Despite 
her recent promises regarding any future foreign travel, Applicant’s past conduct shows 
she maintained a footprint in Bulgaria that she was unwilling to relinquish. Applicant 
stated that she has returned her expired passport to Bulgaria and does not intend to 
renew or reapply for it in the future. Based on her past statements and conduct, I cannot 
conclude she has mitigated the foreign preference concerns. Overall, Applicant has not 
resolved questions and doubts about her eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline C, 
foreign preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
