The Government submitted six items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-09279
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On December 8, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated June 19,
2015.  Applicant received the FORM on July 29, 2015. Applicant did not submit any1
response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
She was unemployed from January 2007 to March 2007 and from March 2005 to June 2005.      2
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations (1.a through
1.o) under Guideline F. She also provided explanations. 
Applicant is 41 years old. She is single and has one son. Applicant attended
college, but she has not obtained an undergraduate degree. She served in the U.S.
Navy from 1999 to 2007, receiving an honorable discharge. (Item 3) Since 2010,
Applicant has been employed with her current employer. She completed an application
for a security clearance on May 18, 2012. (Item 3)
Financial
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately $134,000. The
majority of the debts are student loans. (Item 4 and 5) In addition, she filed a Chapter
13 bankruptcy petition in 2013, which listed over $116,000 in liabilities. (Item 6)  In her
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she is aware of her debts. She noted that she
overextended herself but that she has a bankruptcy plan so that this situation with debt
would not occur again. She explained that when the bankruptcy plan is over in 2018,
she will resolve any other debts that she may have. She reported that she has worked
for one contractor for more than eight years.  She stated that she would never do2
anything to jeopardize her position. (Item 2)
As to the bankruptcy plan, Applicant’s required monthly payments are $706. She
did not provide any evidence of payments made to the plan. Schedule E of the plan
listed $2,000 for federal tax liability. (Item 6)
Applicant disclosed on her 2012 security clearance application that her wages
were being garnished for various student loans from 1997, which amounted to about
$38,000. She also listed an automobile loan in the amount of $7,714, that was being
garnished from her pay. (Item 3)
The record is silent as to any extenuating circumstances that caused the
delinquent student loans. The credit reports list additional debts that do not appear on
the bankruptcy petition. The status of these debts is not clear from the record. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
3
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
4
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt in the approximate  amount of $134,000. Her
admissions and credit reports confirm the delinquent debts. She filed a Chapter 13
bankruptcy petition in 2013. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate security
concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant filed for bankruptcy
in 2013, but there is no evidence of any payments that have been made. The status of
the bankruptcy is not clear. There are other unresolved delinquent debts as well.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant has worked since 2008, after some unemployment earlier in
her career. She did not present any information that would allow this mitigating
condition to apply. Although she filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan in 2013, there is no
record of any payments made. She did not produce any documentation that she acted
responsibly under the circumstances. She also has additional debts not on the petition.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. There is some indication that she
agreed to a garnishment in her 2012 security clearance application for several student
5
debts. The filing of a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in 2013 is a way to resolve her
debts, but there is no information to show that she has made any payments. The record
is silent as to financial counseling.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the
problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply because there are no
indications her financial problems are being resolved or under control.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the Applicant. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 41-year-old single mother. She has attended college classes for many
years, but has not obtained a degree. She has outstanding student loans that she has
included in a 2013 bankruptcy plan. She did not provide any information as to the cause
of her inability to pay her student loans. She did not present evidence that she is
making her monthly payments to the bankruptcy plan. She has other delinquent debts
that do not appear in the petition. She has not provided any information to carry her
burden of mitigation in this case.
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-o: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
