 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 12-09590 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleges he is approximately $97,000 past due on a home mortgage and has two 
delinquent charged-off accounts, which total more than $14,000. He provided no 
documentation of payment on his delinquent obligations. Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 On May 21, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons detailing security concerns. On June 5, 2015, 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
TheDefense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 21, 
2015. The FORM contained five attachments (Items). On August 21, 2015, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. 
He was informed he could submit any material he wished to be considered. DC had no 
objection to his timely response to the FORM. (FORM Answer) On October 13, 2015, I 
was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted being delinquent on the mortgage 
of his rental property and denied two charged-off accounts asserting he was the victim 
of identity theft. He also asserted the mortgage debt listed in SOR 1.a and the mortgage 
debt listed in SOR 1.d were the same obligation. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as 
facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old senior Windows administrator who has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2011 and seeks to retain a security clearance. 
(Item 3, FORM Answer) He had been unemployed from April 2004 through October 
2004. (Item 2) He provided no information about his duty performance and provided no 
character reference letters.  
 
 In Applicant’s April 2011 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), he indicated he was past due on his mortgage and delinquent on a number of 
other accounts. (Item 2) In his e-QIP, he indicated that he used his good credit to obtain 
credit cards which were used to obtain money to purchase real estate. (Item 2) The real 
estate was purchased in hopes of reselling it. However, after ten months and after 
$100,000 had been charged on the cards, the individual who had promised to repay the 
amounts borrowed on the credit cards stopped paying and disappeared. Applicant 
asserts, but provided no documentation, that the creditors offered to settle the debt for 
$40,000. (Item 3) Even if there was an offer, there is no documentation showing the 
offer was accepted or that payment has been made in accord with an agreement. 
 
  In October 2007, Applicant purchased real estate for $120,750 with $850 
monthly payments. (Item 4) He asserts the mortgage was on rental property in a 
different state. He was unable to make his payments because his renters were not 
paying the rent. (Item 3) The mortgage was sold from the mortgage company listed in 
SOR 1.d to the mortgage company listed in SOR 1.a. (FORM Answer) In July 2010, he 
stopped making payments on the property when he was informed it was going to 
foreclosure. (Item 3) His April 2012 credit report indicates $131,698 was owed on the 
real estate. (Item 5)  
 
 In his FORM Answer, Applicant asserts he would like to do a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure to address his delinquent mortgage payments. If that is not acceptable, he 
 
3 
wants to start paying the lender $850 monthly, which was the monthly amount originally 
set forth in the mortgage. There is no documentation to indicate Applicant informed the 
lender of these proposals, that the lender accepted the proposed offers, or that payment 
was made in accord with any settlement reached. 
 
 In Applicant’s e-QIP, he stated he was working with a debt settlement company 
to address the delinquent credit cards. However, in his May 2012 Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) he stated he had received a letter that the company had gone out of 
business after he had made one payment to the company. The company never 
forwarded any money to Applicant’s creditors. Applicant failed to document payment to 
any of the credit lenders.  
 
 Applicant’s April 2012 credit report lists the past-due mortgage (SOR 1.d, 
$131,6982) and the two charged-off accounts (SOR 1.b, $10,404 and SOR 1.c, $3,915). 
In his May 2012 PSI, he acknowledged all three accounts were correct and that they 
were his debts. (Item 3) However, by the time he answered the SOR and answered the 
FORM, he was asserting that he was the 2012 victim of identity theft and the debts were 
not his. (Item 1, FORM Answer) Applicant assets these two delinquent accounts do not 
appear on his August 2015 credit report. (FORM Answer) However, he failed to provide 
a copy of that credit report.  
 
 In Applicant’s FORM answer, he stated he sought counseling from a financial 
counselor, but failed to indicate what the counselor was doing for him or what he 
learned from the counseling. He stated in 2004, he sought guidance from two other 
financial companies. One was the debt settlement company earlier discussed to which 
he made a single payment. The other company he received counseling from may or 
may not, based on the company’s initials, be the same financial company that Applicant 
asserts scammed him. (FORM Answer, Item 3) He provided no documentation as to 
what services these two companies provided him or what information he obtained from 
the counseling received. 
 
 Applicant’s April 2012 credit report lists the delinquent mortgage and the two 
charged-off accounts, but also lists 40 accounts as being or as having been “Paid as 
Agreed.” 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
2 The mortgage obligation in SOR 1.a and 1.d are the same obligation. Therefore, SOR 1.a was found for 
Applicant. 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has not made a payment on one of his mortgages since July 2010 and 
is more than $44,000 past due on the account. He also has two delinquent charged-off 
accounts totaling more than $14,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. In April 2012, he 
acknowledged owing the mortgage and the two charged-off accounts. Three years later, 
he now asserts the charged-off accounts are no longer his debts. He has been 
employed with his current employer since November 2011. He was unemployed for ten 
months, but that occurred eleven years ago. In May 2012, he was made aware of the 
Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. He has made no payments on his 
delinquent obligations. By failing to document the payment of delinquent debts he has 
failed to act responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 In June 2015, Applicant received the SOR listing the Government’s concern over 
his delinquent accounts. In August 2015, he received the FORM, again informing him of 
the Government’s concern. All that he presented in mitigation was that he intended to 
offer a deed in lieu of foreclosure or start again making the original $850 monthly 
payments on his overdue mortgage payments. He provided no documentation these 
offers were forwarded to the mortgage company or that the mortgage company agreed 
to either offer.  
 
 Applicant was given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, 
Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He provided no 
evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. Nor has he demonstrated that 
his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring them under 
control. The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(c) do not apply. There is no showing 
of a good-faith effort to satisfy debts or a showing that payments have been made in 
accord with a repayment agreement. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply because Applicant has failed to document payment on his mortgage or 
charged-off accounts.  
 
The housing market caused real estate prices to decline. However, Applicant 
provided no information as to how and why he was unable to pay his mortgage other 
than his renters were untrustworthy. There is evidence the investment property was 
rented at one time, but there is little evidence showing factors beyond his control. AG & 
20(b) does not apply.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply even though 
Applicant disputed the two charge-off accounts. The mitigating condition requires not 
only that there be a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem, but Applicant must provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue. He failed to provide any documentation as to these two delinquent obligations.  
 
 
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on his delinquent accounts. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since his May 2012 interview, which was reinforced 
by the June 2015 SOR, and August 2015 FORM. There is no documentation of 
payment.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. He failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past 
efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to show he has had any recent 
communication with his creditors. By relying solely on the explanation in his response to 
the FORM, he failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
 
8 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:   For Applicant3  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3 The mortgage obligation listed in SOR 1.a and SOR 1.d are the same obligation. Since the SOR 
duplicates the debt, the debt listed in SOR 1.d was found for Applicant.  
