 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09110 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, Department of 
Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
January 15, 2015, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD in 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
On May 21, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 15, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 7. On August 27, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and provide 
additional information. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on October 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 13 delinquent debts totaling $52,796. Nine 
are medical debts, including the largest for $48,628. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted each allegation. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old truck driver who has been working for a defense 
contractor since September 2011. He graduated from high school in 1991. He served in 
the military for about three months in 1991. In his SCA, he reported being married twice. 
He married his current wife in June 2001. He has one child who is 23 years old. He is 
seeking a security clearance for the first time.2 
 
 In 1999, Applicant had three heart attacks in the same week and was 
hospitalized for a week. His treatment resulted in the $48,628 medical bill reflected in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. One of the heart attacks occurred while he was at work. He indicated the 
medical bills should have been covered by a former employer’s health plan or workers’ 
compensation. He also indicated that he received collection notices for this debt, but 
ignored them because the bill should have been covered by insurance. His former 
employer has since gone out of business. No documentation was presented to show 
that he disputed this debt.3  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c through 1.j. He provided proof that he paid the state tax liens in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($1,152) 
and 1.j ($1,053), but failed to provide proof that he paid the other debts. In the FORM, 
the Department Counsel highlighted the need for Applicant to provide documentation 
showing payment or resolution of the other debts. As noted above, he did not submit a 
response to the FORM.4 
  
  In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated the creditors of the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m had not contacted him. He provided no proof that those 
debts have been resolved. As for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, he simply admitted that debt 
and provided no proof of its resolution. His wife has attended a debt-counseling 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 3, 4, 5 and 7. 
 
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Item 6.  
 
4 Item 3.   
 
 
3 
 
 
seminar. He also indicated that he and his wife had an appointment to meet with a debt 
counselor.5 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
                                                          
5 Items 3 and 6. 
 
4 
 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are ongoing and significant. In 1999, Applicant suffered three heart attacks that 
resulted in a large medical bill. While he claims health insurance or workers’ 
compensation should have covered that medical bill, his credit reports reflect that it 
remains unresolved. He failed to show that he acted responsibly by taking appropriate 
steps to ensure its payment by health insurance or workers’ compensation. No proof 
was presented that he disputed that debt. He provided proof that he paid two state tax 
liens (SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j). He claims he paid other debts but provided no proof of those 
payments. In general, insufficient evidence was presented to conclude that most of his 
delinquent debts have been resolved or are being resolved. His financial problems 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the state tax liens in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j, 
but not to the other alleged debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.6 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. His financial problems leave me with doubts as to his current 
eligibility to access classified information. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly 
                                                          
6 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
consistent with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
