1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No. 12-07785 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F (financial considerations) trustworthiness 
concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On December 11, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and modified; DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with national security to 
grant or continue a public trust position for Applicant, and referred her case to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether her access to sensitive information  
should be granted or denied. 
2 
 
On March 11, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated April 22, 2015, was provided to her by letter dated August 5, 
2015. On September 3, 2015, Applicant received the FORM. She was afforded a period 
of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not provide additional information within the 30-day period after receipt of 
the FORM. On October 27, 2015, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old computer programmer employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2012. She seeks a public trust position in conjunction with her 
current employment. (Item 4, Item 6) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1970. She was awarded a bachelor’s 
degree in 1975 and a master’s degree in 1979. Applicant was married form 1969 to 
1974, and that marriage ended by divorce. She has one adult son. Applicant did not 
serve in the armed forces. (Item 1)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains nine delinquent debts, totaling approximately $14,469. 
These debts are from a variety of creditors and range from a $200 collection account to 
a $9,905 charged-off credit card account. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.i) 
 
There is substantial evidence to support the SOR allegations through Applicant’s 
admissions, her credit reports dated April 13, 2012, and April 21, 2015, and her April 25, 
2012 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI). (Item 2, 
Item 5, Item 6, Item 7) Her record of indebtedness began in approximately 2009 and 
has been ongoing. (Item 5, Item 6)  
 
In her SF-86, Applicant reported her numerous debts and discussed them during 
her OPM PSI and in her March 5, 2014 Interrogatory Response. (Item 4, Item 6) 
Applicant explains in her OPM PSI that her financial problems began when she was laid 
off by a large U.S. company in March 2009. (Item 4, Item 6) In her OPM PSI, Applicant 
stated that she lives paycheck to paycheck and that her attempts to resolve her debts 
by summer 2013 were derailed when her son went missing as a result of a medical 
condition. She traveled cross-country to locate him and fell behind on her homeowner 
association payments, leading to a costly legal dispute. (Item 6) 
 
In answering her SOR, Applicant denies each debt alleged, but offers no 
explanation beyond her denials, and offers no documentation to establish the current 
status of the debts. (Item 3) She provides no documentation of any attempts to pay her 
3 
 
debts or of a good-faith effort to otherwise resolve her debts.  As noted, Applicant did 
not submit such information after being provided with an opportunity to do so following 
receipt of her FORM. Applicant’s SOR debts remain unresolved according to her April 
21, 2015 credit report. (Item 7) She has not sought financial counseling. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
4 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concern. The available information 
shows that Applicant has taken little or no affirmative action to resolve her delinquent 
debts. 
 
With that said, an adjudication of eligibility for a public trust position is not aimed 
at collecting debts.2 Rather the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In 
evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that [she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that [she] has 
established a plan to resolve [her] financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
                                                          
1
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
2
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
6 
 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of [her] 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.3 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances, 
articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. She failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past efforts to 
address her delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on a 
the limited information contained in the FORM, financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns remain. 
 
 After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,4 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant her eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
4
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
