KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The evidence of record does not support Applicant’s theory that he has mitigated
delinquent debts for which the creditors have not filed a proof of claim in his ongoing Chapter
13 bankruptcy proceeding.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 12-06592.a1
DATE: 11/13/2015
DATE: November 13, 2015
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-06592
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On
May 2, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On September 30,
2015, after the close of the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)Administrative
Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely
appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is 46 years old.  He experienced
23 months of unemployment between 2009 and 2012.  He is indebted to eight creditors for
approximately $27,000 in delinquent debt.  Applicant blames the periods of unemployment and the
dissolution of his marriage in 2003 for his financial problems.  
In August 2014, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection and sought a
repayment plan for $76,000 in debt.  He has paid over $22,000 into the plan since September 2014,
$21,000 of which has been paid to his creditors.  Of the eight debts alleged in the SOR, only two of
the creditors have filed claims with the bankruptcy trustee.  Applicant claims the other six creditors
did not pursue claims because he resolved the debts or because the creditors have no record of any
delinquent balances attributable to him.  He did not submit any evidence showing that he paid any
of the SOR debts before filing for bankruptcy protection.  Aside from general details about his
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, Applicant did not provide any information about his current
finances.  
Applicant was convicted of DUI in 1999.  In response to the question on his security
clearance application, “Have you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?”
Applicant indicated that he had not.  In a 2012 background interview, Applicant stated that he did
not report the incident on his clearance application because he did not think it was reported on his
arrest record.  When answering the falsification allegation in the SOR, Applicant stated that he
misunderstood the word “ever” as used in the question.
Applicant admits that, in 2008, his security clearance was revoked after he falsified a 2006
application by failing to disclose numerous delinquent debts and the 1999 DUI conviction.       
The Judge reached the following conclusions:  Applicant has demonstrated an inability to
pay his debts as well as a history of not doing so.  He receives partial mitigation for his efforts to
reduce his debt through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan because it shows a willingness to
repay his creditors.  However this does not fully mitigate the financial concerns raised in the SOR
because only two of the eight SOR debts are being repaid in Applicant’s Chapter 13 payment plan,
as those creditors filed claims with the trustee.  Just because six of Applicant’s creditors chose not
3
to file claims with the trustee does not mean that the accounts have been resolved in his favor, as he
claims.  He did not provide any evidence indicating that he paid any of the six accounts or that the
creditors have forgiven the debts.  A creditor’s decision not actively to collect a debt does not relieve
Applicant from repaying debts he knowingly incurred.  
Although Applicant experienced some periods of unemployment, he did not establish that
his financial problems were entirely beyond his control or that he has acted responsibly in light of
them.  He has not provided sufficient evidence to support a finding of financial rehabilitation or
reform.
The record contains sufficient circumstantial evidence of Applicant’s intent to falsify his
security clearance application.  His explanations are not credible.  The language of the question is
clear.  A reasonable person would understand that disclosure of the 1999 conviction was required.
Applicant has a history of attempting to hide derogatory information from the government as shown
by the falsification of his 2006 security clearance application.  
Applicant argues that the Judge’s decision was in error regarding his financial situation.  He
states that, based on Chapter 13 bankruptcy law, all debts not otherwise exempt from discharge will
be discharged whether or not a creditor has filed a proof of claim with the bankruptcy trustee.  He
asserts that the proof of claim is an optional filing on the part of the creditor and is used only if the
creditor has proof of such debt and chooses to receive payment on the debt, which shall nonetheless,
be discharged by the bankruptcy court freeing the debtor of said obligation.  Although Applicant’s
argument is not completely clear, he seems to be asserting that the Judge erred when she concluded
that  six SOR debts have not necessarily been resolved in his favor since no proof of claim was filed
in the course of the bankruptcy proceedings.
Applicant has failed to establish harmful error on the part of the Judge.  She concluded that
the case against Applicant was only partially mitigated.  This conclusion was based on her
observation that only two of Applicant’s SOR debts out of eight were being repaid under the Chapter
13 payment plan.  Her doubts about the status of the remaining six debts were appropriate,
considering the fact that two of the debts (1.b. and 1.h.) do not appear at all on the list of creditors
in the bankruptcy documents and there is no evidence that Applicant has made payment, attempted
payment, or has otherwise addressed these debts.  The other debts are listed in the bankruptcy
documents in the category of “claim not filed.”  The Judge’s basic conclusion that Applicant did not
produce sufficient evidence to establish that his other six debts are being paid or are otherwise being
resolved is bolstered by the fact that details of Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan were not
provided by him.  Furthermore, since the bankruptcy is still in progress, it is premature to draw
conclusions about the eventual status of the debts when such conclusions are based on a presumption
of eventual bankruptcy discharge.  Of course, given sufficient evidence, a Chapter 13 bankruptcy
could be a part of a pattern of mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21,
2008)(“There is no requirement that a plan provide for payment on all outstanding debts
simultaneously.  Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment
of such debts one at a time”).
1Applicant is possibly asserting on appeal that all of his debts not otherwise exempt from discharge will be
discharged in his Chapter 13 proceeding, regardless of the status of the debt (proof of claim filed or not, or included in
the bankruptcy or not).  If this is his meaning, Applicant fails to cite to any applicable statute or case law in support of
such a proposition.  In any case, it would be inappropriate to rely on an event that has not yet occurred.    
4
Regarding mitigation, Applicant bears the burden of production.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Given
the state of the record, including the lack of specifics regarding the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, the
Judge’s ultimate conclusion that Applicant failed to demonstrate sufficient rehabilitation or reform
to overcome the financial considerations concerns is sustainable.1        
Applicant argues that, when completing his security clearance application, he was in no way
trying to be deceitful or misleading in reference to the 1999 DWI offense.  He states that he failed
to list the offense because he paid restitution and did not think it was on his arrest record since it was
over ten years old and never affected his insurance rates.  Applicant has failed to establish error on
the part of the Judge.
The Board notes that Applicant’s assertion on appeal merely repeats his assertion below that
he did not think the offense was on his arrest record.  This explanation differs from his explanation
in his answer to the SOR, where he asserted that he misunderstood the word “ever” as used in the
question.  The Board also notes that the pertinent question asks if Applicant had ever been charged
with an offense relating to alcohol and drugs, and makes no provision for the possibility that a
charge might be removed from the books because of age or some other reason.  The Judge based her
conclusion regarding Applicant’s state of mind on the fact that his explanations for his “no” answer
varied, and the fact that the language of the question is clear on its face.  The Board concludes that
there is sufficient circumstantial evidence to support the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant intended
to falsify his answer.    
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan     
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
5
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett         
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
