 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-102551 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 13, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 13, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 15, 
                                                          
1 The ISCR number was misidentified in the SOR. The above number is correct. 
 
 
2 
 
2015, scheduling the hearing for August 17, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A - C, F - N, Q, S, 
and U - Y, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on August 25, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2006. She seeks to retain a security clearance, which she 
has held since about 2007. She attended college for a period, but she did not earn a 
degree. She is married with a child and three stepchildren.2 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems. Her husband is a disabled veteran 
who is unable to work. Applicant admitted that she was irresponsible, and she neglected 
her financial obligations. The adjudicative process caused her to reevaluate her 
priorities, and she set about correcting her financial mess. She attempted to pay her 
debts on her own for a period. She then engaged the services of a credit-counseling 
company. She enrolled eight debts in the company’s debt-management program 
(DMP). She pays the company $268 per month. She is also paying other debts outside 
the plan.3 
 
 The SOR alleges 22 delinquent debts, but two of the debts are duplicates. 
Applicant was unable to admit or deny owing the unidentified $161 medical debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d. She admitted owing all of the remaining debts at one point. Credit reports 
from March 2012 and October 2014 substantiate the debts. Applicant submitted a credit 
report from April 2015.4 The debts are addressed in the table below. 
 
SOR AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.a Auto loan $4,879 Deficiency on loan after vehicle was 
repossessed. May 2015 settlement 
agreement for $1,512, payable 
through $79 monthly payments. 
Tr. at 41-42; 
Response to 
SOR; AE A. 
1.b Payday loan $1,492 April 2015 payment agreement for 
$114 monthly payments. Placed in 
DMP. 
Response to 
SOR; AE B, X. 
1.c & 1.i (duplicate 
accounts) Satellite 
television 
$522 Paid $182 toward $365 settlement 
in May 2015. Placed in DMP. 
Response to 
SOR; AE C, I, 
X. 
1.d Medical debt $161 
 
Unidentified debt not listed on 2015 
credit report. 
Response to 
SOR; AE W. 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 30, 33-34, 36; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 29-34, 36-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 GE 2-5. 
 
 
3 
 
1.e Debt $133 Stated that debt paid. No 
documentation.  
Response to 
SOR. 
1.f Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$29 Paid May 2015. Response to 
SOR; AE F. 
1.g Utility company  $35 Paid May 2015. Response to 
SOR; AE G. 
1.h Auto loan $12,114 Deficiency on loan after vehicle was 
repossessed. Stipulated judgment 
with balance of $6,827 and $300 
monthly payments. 
Tr. at 33, 40-
41; Response 
to SOR; AE H. 
1.j Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$302 Creditor deleted account from credit 
report. 
Response to 
SOR; GE 3, 4; 
AE J, W. 
1.k Collection 
company 
$168 Creditor deleted account from credit 
report. 
Response to 
SOR; GE 3, 4; 
AE K, W. 
1.l Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$808 
 
Stipulated judgment with settlement 
of $912 and $100 monthly 
payments. Placed in DMP. 
Response to 
SOR; AE L, X. 
1.m Collection 
company 
$474 Settled. Response to 
SOR; AE M. 
1.n Collection 
company 
$705 Payment arrangements. Placed in 
DMP. 
Response to 
SOR; AE N, X.
1.o Collection 
company  
$219 Stated paid. Not listed on two most 
recent credit reports. 
Response to 
SOR; GE 3, 4; 
AE W. 
1.p. Collection 
company/ 
apartment 
$426 Placed in DMP. Response to 
SOR; AE X. 
1.q Collection 
company/bank 
$415 Settlement agreement. Placed in 
DMP. 
Response to 
SOR; AE Q, X.
1.r Collection 
company/ 
telecommunications 
company 
$406 Stated paid. Not listed on two most 
recent credit reports. 
Tr. at 43; 
Response to 
SOR; GE 3, 4; 
AE W. 
1.s Collection 
company/cable 
company 
$333 
 
Unresolved. Not listed on two most 
recent credit reports. 
Response to 
SOR; GE 3, 4; 
AE W. 
1.t Collection 
company/gym 
membership 
$925 Payment plan. Not listed on two 
most recent credit reports. 
Tr. at 44; 
Response to 
SOR; GE 3, 4; 
AE W. 
1.u Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$1,061 
 
Placed in DMP. Response to 
SOR; AE U, V, 
X. 
 
4 
 
1.v Collection 
company 
$1,487 Placed in DMP. Response to 
SOR; AE X. 
 
 Applicant works a second job to assist in her efforts to address her financial 
problems. She uses the income from her second job to pay her delinquent debts. She 
credibly testified that she will continue to pay her debts until they are all resolved.5 
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to her excellent job performance, 
leadership, work ethic, honesty, trustworthiness, dependability, dedication, reliability, 
and integrity.6  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 33-35, 39-40, 44-50. 
 
6 AE Y. 
 
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from her irresponsibility and not from 
events that were beyond her control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant matured and realized she had to address her financial problems. She 
obtained a second job and started repaying her debts. She required additional 
assistance and contracted with a credit-counseling company. She enrolled eight debts 
in the company’s DMP. She credibly testified that she will continue with her payment 
plans until the debts are paid. 
 
 I find that Applicant established a plan to resolve her financial problems, and she 
took significant action to implement that plan. She acted responsibly and made a good-
faith effort to pay her debts. There are clear indications that her financial problems are 
being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely 
applicable because Applicant is still in the process of paying her debts.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
7 
 
Applicant has matured from the irresponsible person who did not pay her debts. 
She is working two jobs and is a highly regarded and trusted employee. She was a 
credible witness. I am satisfied that she is committed to paying her debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
