 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10219 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 18, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 18, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 27, 2015. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-6 and is admitted into the record. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on September 14, 2015. Applicant was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. She submitted exhibit AE A (with attachments 1-10), which was admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the debts listed in the SOR. 
The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings 
and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She has worked for a federal contractor since March 
2010. She is married with two children, ages eight and four. As of August 2015, she has 
a protective order in place against her husband because of alleged abuse. She has a 
high school diploma and is pursuing a bachelor’s degree. She served in the Navy 
inactive reserve from 2002 to 2007 and held a security clearance then.2  
  
 The SOR lists 18 delinquent debts3 totaling approximately $25,637. The debts 
included collection accounts, charged-off accounts, past-due accounts, judgments, and 
a federal tax debt. The debts are supported by credit reports from March 2012 and 
October 2014, answers in Applicant’s security clearance application from February 
2012, and by her statements to a defense investigator in April 2012.4 
 
 Applicant financial difficulties arose as a result of unemployment and under 
employment for both her and her husband from 2007 to 2009. In 2009, her husband 
obtained a higher-paying job, and in 2010 she obtained her current employment, which 
is a much better paying job. She is currently separated from her husband and claims 
that he emptied out their joint bank account before leaving their home. She thought she 
was receiving financial counseling, but it turned out the person was trying to sell her 
insurance. There is no evidence of a current budget or an earnings and expense 
statement.5 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 2; AE A (attachment 5). 
 
3 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.q are duplicate debts. ¶ 1.q is resolved in favor of Applicant. 
 
4 Items 3-6. 
 
5 Items 2, 4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (past-due account for $2,811): 
 
 Applicant claims she paid this debt and stated in both her May 2015 answer and 
her October 2015 response to the FORM that she would supply proof of payment. She 
failed to supply any supporting documentation. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (collection account for $1,074): 
 
 Applicant claims she set up payment plan for this debt. She supplied 
documentation showing establishment of a settlement plan where she is to pay $107 
monthly beginning in May 2015. She failed to supply any supporting documentation 
showing payments have been made. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (charged-off account for $920): 
 
 Applicant claims she set up payment plan for this debt. She supplied 
documentation showing establishment of a settlement plan where she is to pay $123 
monthly beginning in May 2015. She failed to supply any supporting documentation 
showing payments have been made. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (charged-off account for $660): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing this debt was satisfied in May 2015. 
This debt is resolved.9 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.j - 1.l (collection accounts for $335; $170; $144; $75; $40): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing she reached a payment agreement 
with these creditors and she made the first $80 monthly payment in May 2015. She did 
not provide documentation showing subsequent monthly payments. These debts are 
unresolved.10 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Item 2; AE A. 
 
7 Item 2 (enclosure 2); AE A. 
 
8 Item 2 (enclosure 3); AE A. 
 
9 Item 2; AE A (attachment 9). 
 
10 Item 2 (enclosure 4); AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (collection account for $323): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing this debt was satisfied in May 2015. 
This debt is resolved.11 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i (collection accounts for $161; $151): 
 
 Applicant claimed she paid both debts and committed to providing proof of 
payments. She did not provide documentation of payment of either debt. These debts 
are unresolved.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m (judgment for $3,745): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing this judgment was satisfied in April 
2015. This debt is resolved.13 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.o, 1.p (judgment and collection accounts for $1,031; $2,836; 
$1,161): 
 
 Applicant claims she set up payment plan for these debts. She supplied 
documentation showing establishment of settlement plans where she is to pay $105; 
$250; and $273 monthly beginning in May 2015. She failed to supply any supporting 
documentation showing any further payments. These debts are unresolved.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.r (federal tax debt for $10,000): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that her 2014 federal tax refund in the 
amount of $8,324 was involuntarily applied to her 2010 federal tax debt of $11,806 
leaving a balance owed of $3,482. In her answer, she claims that she is working with 
the IRS in an attempt to make payment arrangements on the debt. In her FORM 
response, she claims that her husband is taking care of this issue. There is no proof of 
payment of the remaining balance or of an established payment plan. This debt is 
unresolved.15 
 
                                                          
11 Item 2 (enclosure 5). 
 
12 Item 2; AE A. 
 
13 Item 2 (enclosure 6). 
 
14 Item 2 (enclosures 8, 9); AE A (attachment 10). 
 
15 Item 2 (enclosure 9); AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a coworker who worked with her on a 
program. He described her excellent support for the program and stated she was a loyal 
and trustworthy employee.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
16 Item 2 (enclosure 1). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both the 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and most remain unresolved. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant presented evidence that some debts were due to 
circumstances beyond her control (unemployment, underemployment, separation from 
husband, husband taking funds from bank). For this mitigating condition to apply, she 
must also show responsible action toward resolving the debts. She paid three of the 
debts and showed that she set up payment plans for four other accounts. However, she 
only provided proof of one monthly payment on one of these accounts in May 2015. 
Additionally, her federal tax debt remains. She receives some credit for her efforts under 
AG ¶ 20(b). She attempted to receive some financial counseling, but it turned out to be 
a sales pitch for insurance. She failed to document that her debts are under control by 
showing proof of payments under her payment plans. She has made some efforts to 
pay three of the outstanding debts, but proof of further efforts is lacking. She did not 
provide documented proof of the debts she claimed were already paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i). 
Her federal tax debt remains unpaid. Although the IRS captured a recent tax year 
refund to reduce the debt, this does not constitute a good faith effort by Applicant to pay 
the debt. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the circumstances that 
led to Applicant’s financial problems and her personal situation. Despite the presence of 
some mitigation, she failed to show a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.d:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.e:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.f:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.m:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.n – 1.p:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.q:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.r:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
