 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-11315 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On May 23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On June 9, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated August 28, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated 
September 2, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on September 8, 2015. He was 
afforded 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information after receipt of the FORM, 
which was received without objection from Department Counsel.1 On October 16, 2015, 
DOHA assigned the case to me.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e with 
explanations and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 2.a with explanations. His SOR answers are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old security officer for a defense contractor, who seeks a 
security clearance as a requirement for employment reinstatement. He was hired by his 
employer in May 2012 and was subsequently terminated for failing to secure a security 
clearance. (Item 3; FORM response)  
 
Applicant was awarded an associate’s degree in information technology in June 
2000, and was awarded a diploma in cardiovascular technology in May 2009. (Item 3) 
Applicant was married from May 2004 to June 2006, and that marriage ended by 
divorce. He has no dependents. (Item 3) Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. 
(Item 3) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges six separate debt allegations from four different 
creditors totaling $43,984. He fell behind with his creditors after completing a two-year 
non-accredited cardiovascular technology diploma program in 2009 and was unable to 
find employment in that career field. Applicant was unemployed after completing his 
program during the following time periods: (1) March 2007 to October 2010; (2) 
December 2010 to February 2011; and (3) July 2011 to September 2011. (Item 3) He 
confirmed these periods of unemployment, as well as previous periods of 
unemployment, during his August 16, 2012 Office of Personnel Management Personal 
Subject Interview (OPM PSI). (Item 4) 
 
In 2006, Applicant sold his co-operative property to invest in what he thought 
would be a viable career in cardiovascular technology. He asserts that the school he 
attended withheld or misrepresented information regarding their lack of accreditation in 
cardiovascular technology. The non-accreditation issue posed a significant obstacle to 
Applicant. He discovered that the licensing authority would only allow a graduate of a 
                                                          
1
Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as “FORM response.” 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
non-accredited program to sit for a board exam if they worked in cardiovascular 
technology-related employment for one year. Applicant was unable to find qualifying 
employment after searching for two years and was therefore unable to sit for his board 
exam. Frustrated and unable to go forward, he was forced to abandon his career plans 
in the cardiovascular technology field, but not before incurring substantial debt. (Item 2; 
FORM response) 
 
The following summarizes the status of Applicant’s six SOR debts: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b - Charged-off student loans for $18,243 and $13,328, 
respectively. Applicant consolidated these loans with the creditor and has been making 
$151 monthly payments by direct debit since June 2015. He has provided 
documentation of same. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (Item 2; FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d – Delinquent student loans for $11,371 and $8,127, 
respectively. Applicant consolidated and rehabilitated these loans with the creditor and 
has been making $26 monthly payments by direct debit since June 2015. He provided 
documentation of same. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (Item 2; FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Cell phone collection account for $315. Applicant settled this 
account for the lesser amount of $188.76. He provided documentation that payment 
was debited from his checking account on September 29, 2015. DEBT RESOLVED 
(Item 2, FORM response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f - Cable company collection account in the amount of $53. Applicant 
stated that he canceled service, moved, and was not informed of an outstanding 
balance. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant asserts that before he encountered financial problems following his 
negative experience with the non-accredited cardiovascular technology diploma 
program, he had an “outstanding” credit report. (FORM response) Applicant has not 
received financial counseling. (Item 4)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his May 2012 SF-86, he did not list any of his student 
loan debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. In his FORM response, he stated, “I did not 
falsify financial information on my May 2012 e-QIP. I knew that I owed money to the 
[student loan creditors] and I started making payments with them the time that I did my 
e-QIP (SF-86) so to my knowledge my account was not delinquent.” (FORM response) 
Applicant thoroughly discussed his student loans and other debts during his August 
2012 OPM PSI. During that interview, he stated that he was not financially stable and 
intended to repay the loans when he regained full time employment. (Item 4) 
 
 
 
  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The evidence establishes the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his 
behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement.   
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant sustained significant 
periods of unemployment following his inability to pursue a viable career in 
cardiovascular technology. His explanation for attending and continuing with a non-
accredited school is plausible. It is doubtful Applicant would ever again consider 
attending a non-accredited school, given the financial fallout and personal hardship he 
has since sustained.  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and 20(d) is fully applicable. Although 
Applicant did not receive formal financial counseling, his debts are being resolved and 
there are clear indications that his financial problems are resolved or under control. As 
noted above, Applicant has made a concerted effort to repay his creditors through a 
series of actions to include rehabilitating and repaying his student loans and settling an 
outstanding account. Given Applicant’s resources, he is approaching his debts in a 
responsible and measured way.2 Applicant disputes the validity of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f 
triggering application of AG ¶ 20(e); however, further action is required by Applicant 
challenging this debt so it does not appear on his credit report.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Posing potential security concerns are Applicant’s documented omissions of his 
delinquent student loans from his May 2012 SF-86. His omissions are, however, 
attributable to his mistaken belief that at the time he completed his SF-86 he had started 
making payments and to his “knowledge,” his accounts were not delinquent. However, a 
closer reading of the questions under Section 26 – Financial Record – Delinquency 
Involving Routine Accounts would have required him to list his delinquent student 
loans accounts. He was forthright with the OPM investigator about these accounts and 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
his other debts several months later during his August OPM PSI. While Applicant could 
reasonably have been expected to be more diligent about checking on the status of his 
debts, his judgment lapses are not enough to impute knowing and willful falsification 
under Guideline E. 
 
Applicant’s explanations of his omissions are persuasive enough to avert 
inferences of knowing and willful omission. There being no misconduct substantiated, 
there is no need to discuss extenuation or mitigating conditions. Cf. ISCR Case No. 02-
13568 (App. Bd. Feb. 13, 2004). While Applicant failed to exercise due diligence in 
inquiring into the state of his debts, his mistaken reliance on the unknown status of his 
debts enable him to refute allegations of falsification of his SF-86 covered in 
subparagraph 2.a under Guideline E. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guidelines F and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E and the whole-person 
analysis support a favorable decision. Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor 
weighs heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of 
society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR 
debts are resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
(internal citations omitted). 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will resolve the remaining debts on 
his SOR and maintain his financial responsibility.3    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the 
security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative 
security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise 
made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and 
may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s security clearance is 
conditional. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:  FOR APPLICANT  
 
         Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
