 
1 
 
 
																																																														
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10131 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
 
2 
 
 
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. On April 20, 2015, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me on June 15, 2015. On 
July 6, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing scheduling the hearing for July 21, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled.  
Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive.1 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through J. 
The record of the proceeding was left open until August 4, 2015, to provide Applicant an 
opportunity to present additional matters. Applicant submitted documents that were 
marked as AE K through O. All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on July 27, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a DOD contractor. He has been working 
for that contractor since June 2005. He graduated from high school in 1984, received a 
bachelor’s degree in 2008, and a master’s degree in 2010. He served in the Army from 
January 1985 to May 2005 and retired in the grade of first sergeant (E-8). He has been 
married five times. He married his current wife in 2010. He has three children, ages 5, 
13, and 23. He has held a security clearance since about 1985.2 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had four delinquent debts totaling $88,883. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied each allegation with explanations. Credit reports 
dated June 14, 2012, and October 29, 2014, contain entries establishing each debt.3 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the financial irresponsibility of his 
fourth wife and their divorce in 2008. In an interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, Applicant stated that his fourth wife caused their 
financial problems by spending too much money. He indicated they lived above their 
means and were not able to pay their bills. Each of the four SOR debts dates back to 
when Applicant was married to his fourth wife.4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b – first and second mortgage loans with past-due amounts 
totaling $25,410 and outstanding balances totaling $508,612. These mortgage loans 
were for a home that Applicant and his fourth wife purchased for about $500,000 in 
                                                          
1 Tr. 13-15.  
2 Tr. 6-8, 36-38, 40-52; GE 1; AE A. 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3, 4.  “It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit 
report can normally meet the substantial basis standard and the government’s obligation under ¶ E3.1.14 
[of the Directive] for pertinent allegations.” See ISCR 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010).  
4 Tr. 35-40; GE 2.  
 
3 
 
 
2007. His monthly mortgage payments were about $3,200. Prior to his divorce in 2008, 
Applicant obtained a mortgage loan modification, but that did not resolve his problems. 
He requested a second loan modification, but that was denied. Due to a downturn in the 
real estate market, the value of his home had decreased to about $120,000 less than 
the amount he owed on the mortgage loans. Following his divorce, he requested 
authorization to execute a deed in lieu of foreclose. The lender was willing to accept a 
deed in lieu of foreclosure, but his ex-wife refused to sign the documents. He next 
requested authorization for a short sale, but never received a response from the lender. 
The lender eventually foreclosed on the property and later sold it. He indicated that 
public records revealed the property sold for $389,000. He never received an IRS Form 
1099 concerning the foreclosure or resale. In his post-hearing submission, he provided 
a credit report dated July 31, 2015, reflecting that both mortgage loans had zero 
balances and zero past-due amounts. The remarks section of the entry for the first 
mortgage reflected “Foreclosure redeemed.” These mortgage loans are resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – charged-off account for $34,734.  This was a vehicle loan that was 
opened in 2007. Applicant’s ex-wife used this vehicle, while he drove a 17-year-old 
vehicle that had been fully paid. He testified that they purchased the new vehicle for 
about $38,000. The monthly payments were about $800. When they separated she left 
the vehicle in the driveway. In about 2009, the vehicle was repossessed after Applicant 
requested the creditor retrieve it. He did not know whether the vehicle was resold. 
Applicant disputed this debt. An entry in the credit report dated February 24, 2015, 
reflected that this debt was deleted from the credit file. This debt did not appear on his 
credit report dated July 31, 2015. This debt is resolved.6  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – judgment for $28,739. This was a personal loan that Applicant 
obtained to consolidate marital debts. In 2012, Applicant entered into a consent 
judgment with the creditor. Under that agreement, payments of $400 per month were 
automatically withdrawn from his checking account. These payments were made for two 
years, totaling about $9,600, until the debt was transferred to another collection agency. 
At that point, he received notices that the payments were no longer being accepted. He 
later negotiated a settlement with the new collection agency. He provided 
documentation showing he paid an additional $5,000 to fully satisfy this debt.7  
 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided a personal financial statement 
that reflected his total net monthly income was $6,573, his total monthly expenses were 
$3,490, and his total monthly debt payments were $892, which left him a net monthly 
remainder of $2,191. He also reported having $35,582 in savings and $80,000 in stocks 
and bonds.8 
                                                          
5 Tr. 52-63; GE 3, 4; AE O; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
6 Tr. 63-68; GE 3, 4; AE I, O; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
7 Tr. 68-72; GE 3, 4; AE B, C, D, O; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
8 AE N.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s work performance reviews for 2013 and 2014 reflect that he 
successfully achieved all expectations and was a valued leader and manager. He is 
described as a role model of company values. A coworker indicated that Applicant is a 
person of good moral character who is an invaluable member of the team.9 
 
In the military, Applicant was awarded two Meritorious Service Medals, four Army 
Commendation Medals, ten Army Achievement Medals, and six Army Good Conduct 
Medals.10 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
                                                          
9 AE E-H.  
10 AE A.  
 
5 
 
 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period. Record evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
6 
 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 While married to his fourth wife, Applicant experienced financial problems. He 
claimed she was not fiscally responsible and caused their financial problems. They 
divorced in 2008. Their divorce and her spending habits were conditions beyond his 
control. He attempted to resolve the delinquent mortgage loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) 
through loan modifications, a deed in lieu of foreclosure, and short sale, but those 
efforts were unsuccessful. The property was foreclosed and later sold. His credit reports 
now reflect the mortgage accounts have zero balances. Applicant successfully disputed 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, which has been deleted from his credit report. He has settled and 
paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. His financial problems are limited to the time he was 
married to his fourth wife over seven years ago. There is no evidence of recent financial 
delinquencies. From the evidence presented, I find that his financial problems are 
resolved and are unlikely to recur. His prior financial problems do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. All of the mitigating conditions 
apply to varying degrees.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the military for 20 years and retired in the grade of first 
sergeant. He has worked for his current employer for over ten years and is a valued 
employee. He encountered financial problems in his fourth marriage, but those 
problems have been resolved. For the past seven years, he has not encountered any 
new financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all the above reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the financial security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
    
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
