 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-03993   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 10, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. As listed in the 
SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on ten debts in the total amount of 
$54,535. He has resolved seven of his delinquencies, and he is making payment on the 
remaining three accounts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 24, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 28, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
administrative judge on July 31, 2015, and then reassigned to me on August 18, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 13, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 15, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on September 23, 2015. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional 
exhibits. Applicant presented additional exhibits marked AE B through AE E. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE B through AE E and they were admitted. 
The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He has been employed with his current employer, a 
Government contractor, for 28 years. He is married and has three adult children. He and 
his wife provide care for three foster children and their grandchild.  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owes approximately $54,535 on ten delinquent 
financial obligations. In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, and 1.c 
through 1.h. He denied SOR allegations 1.b, 1.i, and 1.j. His debts are documented in 
the record credit reports dated May 10, 2012; April 9, 2014; July 20, 2015; and 
September 14, 2015. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to be indebted on a loan in the amount of 
$49,153. This debt became delinquent in 2009. Applicant contacted this creditor to 
arrange payments, but the creditor was unwilling to accept payment because it had 
charged off the debt. The creditor sent Applicant a 1099-C showing that the debt was 
discharged. (AE B.) This debt is resolved.  
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted on a delinquent cell phone 
account in the amount of $905. At hearing he testified that he was not familiar with this 
account. However, his post-hearing documentation showed he contacted this creditor 
and arranged to make payments on this debt. On September 29, 2015, he submitted 
$317.98 to this creditor as the first payment under this agreement. Applicant is resolving 
this debt. (AE C.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.g to be indebted to a city 
government for five unpaid parking tickets totaling $401. Applicant testified he loaned 
his vehicle to his daughter while she was attending college and, unbeknownst to him, 
she received parking tickets that she did not pay. He contacted this creditor and 
resolved all five delinquencies. He provided a receipt from the city government to 
document that these tickets were paid in full. (AE D.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h to be indebted on a medical collection 
account in the amount of $21. He contacted the collection agent and resolved this debt 
in full on September 28, 2015, as documented in a letter from this creditor. This debt is 
resolved. (AE E.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i to be indebted on a medical collection 
account in the amount of $3,432. He provided documentation that shows he contacted 
the collection agent and negotiated a monthly payment of $371.49. His first payment 
was made September 15, 2015. This debt is being resolved. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j to be indebted on a medical collection 
account in the amount of $623. He contacted the collection agent and negotiated a 
payment plan of three equal installments of $208.33. While he did not document any 
payments under this plan, he intends to fully resolve this debt. This debt is being 
resolved. (AE E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
 
 
4 
 
 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated ten debts in the total amount of $54,535. These debts 
establish both a history of delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy his 
obligations. The evidence raises security concerns under the above conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following two provide 
mitigation: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant addressed all of his ten delinquent debts. Seven are fully resolved and 
he is making payments on three others. As he resolved those eight debts, he has 
shown a recent track record of making consistent payments. He can be trusted to 
continue to make his monthly payments on his three remaining delinquencies. His 
financial delinquencies are under control and he is making a good-faith effort to repay 
his creditors. Applicant’s indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security concerns with respect to his financial 
delinquencies are mitigated. The above conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served as a 
Government contractor for more than 28 years. He has held a security clearance, 
without violation, that entire time. He acted responsibly by resolving seven debts and 
making payments on three others. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt 
 
 
6 
 
 
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
