 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06589 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 14, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On January 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
                                                          
1
 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated April 14, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated March 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant on August 13, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on August 21, 2015. A response was due by September 20, 2015. 
On September 10, 2015, Applicant submitted his response with attachments. 
Department Counsel had no objections to the documents submitted, and I marked them 
as Applicant Items (AI) A through AI D. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a graphic artist-illustrator and information technology analyst with his current 
employer since March 2012.3 He was previously a senior graphic analyst with another 
defense contractor from December 1997 until March 2012.4 A high school graduate at 
the age of 17, Applicant did not pursue any college education.5 Applicant enlisted in the 
U.S. Army in September 1977 and served honorably until he retired as a master 
sergeant (E-8) in September 1997.6 Applicant was first granted a secret security 
clearance in 1979, a top secret security clearance in 1983, and access to sensitive 
                                                          
2
 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated March 3, 2015). 
 
3
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 8-9. 
 
4
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 8; Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 10, 2014), at 2; Item 4 (Security 
Clearance Application, dated August 27, 2003), at 13-14. 
 
6
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 11-12; Item 4, supra note 5, at 16. Applicant neglected to submit any of his military 
records so there is no evidence of awards, decorations, assignments, or deployments. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
compartmented information (SCI) in 1993.7 Applicant was married to his first wife in 
October 1983 and divorced in May 1986.8 He married his current wife in June 1986.9 He 
has one son (born in 1986) and one daughter (born in 1987).10 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was apparently nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until the period 
2012 to 2014. A review of Applicant’s May 2014 credit report revealed that two 
individual bank credit card accounts had been charged off in September 2012 after 
being over 150 or 180 days past due,11 and seven other accounts had at one point 
during 2014, been past-due 30, 60, or 90 days before being brought current.12 When 
Applicant completed his e-QIP in April 2014, he denied having any delinquent 
accounts.13 During his subsequent interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) in June 2014, Applicant stated that he had “no 
delinquent accounts that he knows of.”14 When he was confronted with the two 
delinquent credit card accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.), Applicant opined that they were 
probably his wife’s accounts, and he indicated he would investigate them.15 It appears 
that Applicant’s wife was substantially active in handling the family finances.  
The SOR identified the two delinquent debts that had been placed for collection 
and charged off, as reflected by the May 2014 credit report and a November 2014 credit 
report.16 The combined unpaid balance of those two debts ($8,564 and $7,181) totals 
approximately $15,745. Applicant inquired of his wife as to the background of the two 
accounts, but she was unable to add any further information. After obtaining a credit 
report, Applicant contacted the creditor to obtain any information that might be available. 
After several unsuccessful attempts to locate the accounts, the creditor finally located 
them, and the following scenario was developed. Applicant’s wife had routinely received 
monthly statements in the mail and she would make what she erroneously concluded 
were the monthly minimum payments. While she was making monthly payments, the 
payments did not always meet the required monthly minimums, and after time, the 
accounts became delinquent. The record is silent as to how or why Applicant’s wife 
                                                          
7
 Item 5, supra note 5, at 2. 
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
9
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
10
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 16-17. 
 
11
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated May 7, 2014), at 7, 20. 
 
12
 Item 6, supra note 11, at 5, 9-10, 14, 18-19. 
 
13
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 25-27. 
 
14
 Item 5, supra note 5, at 3. 
 
15
 Item 5, supra note 5, at 3. 
 
16
 Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated November 20, 2014), at 2.  
 
 
4 
                                      
 
failed to make the monthly minimum payments. In September 2012, both accounts were 
charged off.17 Applicant noted that the creditor had never advised him that the accounts 
had been charged off. Once the accounts were charged off, no monthly statements or 
collection notices were issued.18 Once again, the record is silent as to why Applicant’s 
wife never informed Applicant that the monthly statements had ceased coming.  
Upon being advised of the true status of the accounts, Applicant and the creditor 
entered into repayment agreements. He agreed to make monthly payments of $357 on 
one account and $250 on the other account commencing in February 2015.19 He has 
routinely made those payments by phone as agreed.20 As of August 2015, the unpaid 
balances on the accounts have been reduced to approximately $6,423 and $5,931.21 
The accounts are in the process of being resolved. 
With his Answer to the FORM, Applicant submitted several Wage and Tax 
Statements (W-2) for the tax years 2012 through 2014. The combined annual family 
income for 2012 was approximately $146,424; for 2013, it was approximately $142,863; 
and for 2014, it was approximately $144,958.22 Applicant has never received financial 
counseling.23 With no other delinquent accounts listed in his most recent credit report, it 
appears that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”24 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”25   
                                                          
17
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
18
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
19
 AI A (Payment Schedules, various dates). 
 
20
 Item 2, supra note 2 (Substitute Cancelled Checks, various dates); AI B (Substitute Cancelled Checks, 
various dates); AI C (Statements, various dates). 
 
21
 AI C, supra note 20. 
 
22
 AI D (W-2’s, various dates). 
 
23
 Item 5, supra note 5, at 3. 
 
24
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
25
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”26 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.27  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”28 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”29 Thus, nothing 
                                                          
26
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
27
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
28
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
29
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems initially arose in 2012 and continued 
for several years thereafter. Two credit card accounts became delinquent and were 
placed for collection, and charged off. While there is a brief history a failing to make 
monthly minimum payments on the two accounts, there is no evidence of an inability or 
unwillingness to do so. AG ¶ 19(c) has been established, but ¶ 19(a) has not.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
 
7 
                                      
 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”30  
AG ¶ 20(d) applies, and AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), partially apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems were not caused by his frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he 
did not spend beyond his means. Instead, those limited financial problems occurred 
without his knowledge. Applicant’s wife was apparently in charge of at least a segment 
of the family finances. She routinely made monthly payments for the two credit card 
accounts, but without Applicant’s knowledge, her payments did not always meet the 
required monthly minimum amount. Over time, the accounts became delinquent and in 
September 2012, they were charged off. It is unclear as to how or why she failed to 
make the monthly minimum payments or why she failed to advise Applicant of the 
situation. He was never advised of the failure to maintain monthly minimum payments or 
that the accounts had been charged off. Once the accounts were charged off, no further 
monthly statements or collection notices were issued to him. Applicant and his wife 
apparently served as a team in handling the family accounts. Under normal 
circumstances, that process is a rather acceptable one. Applicant’s wife failed him in 
neglecting to fulfill her share of the responsibilities. His failure to oversee her activities 
more closely, in this instance, may not have been the best course of action, but his 
actions do not reflect a lack of judgment and reliability. This situation occurred under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.31 Once he learned of 
the situation, Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to resolve the two delinquent debts, 
and he is currently in the process of doing so. As noted above, there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
Security clearance adjudications are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require an applicant to establish resolution of each and 
every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve 
financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is no 
requirement that an applicant immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be 
                                                          
30
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
31
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
paid first. Rather, a reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time. Applicant has established and followed such a 
plan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.32   
     
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant failed 
to insure that two of his credit card accounts were handled properly and the monthly 
minimum payments were not made by his wife. Because she had apparently 
miscalculated the minimum amounts due, on many occasions, payments less than the 
minimum amount due were made. As a result, two accounts became delinquent, were 
placed for collection, and charged off.  
 
The mitigating evidence is more substantial and compelling. Applicant served 
honorably in the U.S. Army and retired as an E-8. He has held secret or top secret 
security clearances for over 30 years, sometimes with access to SCI, without any 
negative incidents. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, 
mishandling protected information, substance abuse, or criminal conduct. Applicant’s 
financial problems were not caused by his frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he 
did not spend beyond his means. Rather, they were in some measure beyond his 
control. They arose in 2012, when his wife failed to fulfill her financial responsibilities in 
making monthly minimum payments on two credit card accounts. They were 
exacerbated when Applicant’s wife failed to inform him of the pending problem. Once he 
learned of the situation, Applicant did not ignore his two delinquent accounts. Instead, 
                                                          
32
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966). See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. June 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
he sought out the creditors and established repayment plans. He has made his routine 
monthly payments under those plans since they were established. With no other 
delinquent debts, there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:33 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.’ However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has ‘. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.’) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts. Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:  For Applicant 
   
  
                                                          
33
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
