 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03522 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Andrew S. Wentworth, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2014, and requested a hearing. 
The case was originally assigned to another judge on February 27, 2015, but was 
 
2 
 
 
continued to allow Applicant to retain counsel. He did so, and the case was reassigned 
to me on May 27, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on June 11, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
July 14, 2015. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit index was marked as hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through T, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s exhibit index was marked as HE II. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 24, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He is married and has three children. His youngest 
daughter lives with him along with her two children and one other grandchild. He has 
worked for a defense contractor for 32 years. He has a high school diploma and has 
technical training. He has held a security clearance for 32 years, including 10 years 
holding a top secret clearance.1   
 
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using marijuana from August 
to November 2011 after being granted a security clearance (SOR ¶ 1.a); and (2) in 
November 2011 being arrested for possession of a dangerous drug without a 
prescription and driving under the influence (DUI) of drugs. He pleaded guilty to the DUI 
and was sentenced in July 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Both of these allegations were cross-
alleged as personal conduct disqualifying conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a).  
  
 Applicant suffered a serious back injury in 2009. As a result of the back injury, he 
was prescribed various pain medicines including hydrocodone and morphine sulfur. He 
was also prescribed some muscle relaxers, but these tended to make his judgement 
“blurred.” Applicant experienced smoking marijuana in the 1970s. He was arrested 
several times for using marijuana during that time. He remembered that marijuana 
helped him sleep. From August to November 2011, he resumed using marijuana to help 
him sleep. He held a security clearance at this time. He used marijuana two to three 
times per week before he went to bed. His child and grandchildren were living with him 
when he was using marijuana. He obtained the marijuana from an acquaintance he 
knew from the 1970s. He bought one ounce for $40. He admitted knowing that using 
marijuana was against his company’s drug policy and that it could cause him problems 
because of his security clearance, yet he used it anyway. He did not disclose his 
marijuana use to anyone at work.2 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 27, 48-49; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 28-29, 34-35, 37-39, 43-44, 46, 49; GE 3; AE S-T. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In November 2011, Applicant was driving to work when he had a flat tire. A state 
trooper pulled over to assist Applicant. Applicant had prescription drugs in an unmarked 
pill container and could not produce a valid prescription for the trooper. The trooper 
asked Applicant to perform some field sobriety tests, which he failed. He was arrested 
and taken to a location where a blood test was performed and which showed a positive 
result for the presence of marijuana (THC) in his system. He was charged with DUI as a 
result of the blood test. He was not prosecuted for the prescription drug issue, but 
pleaded guilty to the DUI charge. He was sentenced in July 2013 and completed all 
requirements of his sentence. He claims that he has not used marijuana since the day 
he was arrested and does not intend to in the future.3 
 
 Applicant still suffers from his back condition and remains in constant pain. He 
does not intend to undergo surgery for the condition. He remains on prescription pain 
medicine.4  
  
 Applicant offered documents showing job-related awards he received over the 
years. He also included his job performance evaluations from 2009 to 2014, which show 
his overall performance ranges between “exceeds expectations” to “exceptional.”5 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
3 Tr. 29-31, 39-40; GE 2-3. 
 
4 Tr. 49-50, 53; AE T-S. 
 
5 AE A-K. 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Between August and November 2011, Applicant illegally used marijuana on 
multiple occasions. In November 2011, he was arrested and convicted of DUI involving 
marijuana. His uses during these times occurred while he was holding a security 
clearance. I find that both the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
5 
 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the drug involvement 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a regular basis between August and November 
2011. His period of abstinence since 2011 is insufficient to demonstrate his intent not to 
use marijuana in the future, particularly since he started using again after an abstinence 
of some 35 years. Additionally, he is still experiencing the back pain that led to his use 
of marijuana in 2011. Even though four years have passed since his last marijuana use 
in 2011, his use while holding a security clearance and knowing his actions were illegal 
are cause for significant concern about his judgment. He did not establish that 
recurrence is unlikely. While he apparently has abstained from marijuana use for 
several years and stated in does not intend to use in the future, his past actions, 
particularly his conscious decision to use marijuana while holding a security clearance, 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. It is too soon to 
tell whether his use will recur. Although he claims he no longer uses marijuana, given 
his history of use while holding a security clearance and his willingness to use 
marijuana when his grandchildren resided with him, this is not enough to show a 
demonstrated intent not to use drugs in the future. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) partially 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
Applicant use of marijuana created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. AG ¶ 16(e) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding marijuana use and 
his future intentions. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to demonstrate his 
conduct is unlikely to recur. He started using marijuana again after a 36-year abstinence 
and he still experiences the back pain-issues which led him to resume using marijuana 
in 2011. The evidence is insufficient to support that he has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate his vulnerabilities. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(e) do not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s awards, job 
appraisals, and his years of government contractor service. However, I also considered 
that he used marijuana on multiple occasions while holding a security clearance and 
while living in the same household as his grandchildren. Additionally, he was 58 years 
old at the time of his last use. Despite the presence of some mitigation, Applicant failed 
to provide sufficient evidence to fully mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
