 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05479 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems and criminal conduct, which he did 
not disclose to the Government in his application for a position of trust. He failed to 
present sufficient evidence to mitigate those financial, criminal conduct, and personal 
conduct trustworthiness concerns. Based upon a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD 
C3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness 
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive Information Systems 
Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-
R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation). 
 
On January 31, 2013, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 
85P). On March 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, (Financial Considerations); Guideline J, (Criminal 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conduct); and Guideline E, (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); the Regulation 
(supra); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 27, 2015 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
June 18, 2015, and issued a Notice of Hearing on June 26, 2015. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on July 22, 2015. Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 into evidence, and they were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 30, 
2015. The record remained open until August 14, 2015, to give Applicant an opportunity 
to submit other exhibits. He did not submit any additional documents. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations contained in SOR, except those contained in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.p, 2.a, 2.c, 2.e, 2.f, and 3.a through 3.g, which he denied. His admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact herein.   
 
Applicant is 57 years old and divorced since 1989. He has two adult daughters 
from two previous relationships. He enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1976 and served 
three years active duty, and three years inactive duty. He received an honorable 
discharge. He was at a paygrade of E-4 when discharged. Subsequent to leaving the 
military he earned three associate’s degrees in computer sciences.  
 
Applicant started working for his current employer, a defense contractor, in 2013. 
Prior to this position he interned with a Veteran’s Administration (VA) hospital for a 
period of time, and also worked for a private computer company. (Tr. 31.) His supervisor 
is aware of this security hearing and has read the SOR. (Tr. 33.) 
 
Financial 
 
Applicant has a history of financial difficulties. He filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2012 and the court discharged between $25,000 and $30,000 of delinquent debts in 
2013. (GE 2.) He remained responsible for student loans and some medical bills from 
heart attacks he had in 2006 and 2010. (Tr. 48.) In early 2015 he was admitted to the 
hospital for three weeks for a kidney problem, resulting in additional medical debts. (Tr. 
57; AE C through I.) 
 
Applicant earns about $14.31 per hour or approximately $400 per week, net. He 
receives $1,054 a month for his disability from the Social Security Administration and 
$106 a month through the VA for a medical injury. His total monthly net income is about 
$2,754 and his expenses are about $1,286. (Tr. 35-36, 46; AE A.) He does not use a 
budget. He owes unpaid child support for his adult daughters, which is deducted from 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
his disability payments. (Tr. 38.) Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to his various 
medical problems, the lack of medical insurance, and unemployment for four or five 
months in 2012. (GE 2.)   
 
Based on credit bureau reports from March 2014 and February 2015, the SOR 
alleged 15 delinquent debts totaling $22,831, which accumulated between 2009 and 
2014. The largest debt, $20,786, is an automobile repossession from 2014. The SOR 
also alleged that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012. None of the 15 debts 
are paid or resolved. Seven debts are under $100, and the smallest debt is for $7. 
Applicant said he paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.p, and could provide 
verification of payment. (Tr. 60-61.) He said his student loans were current. (Tr. 53.) He 
did not submit evidence to verify both assertions.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal incidents. He denied that he was arrested in 
October 1994 for non-payment of child support, cocaine possession and driving while 
his license was revoked. He said he called the appropriate sheriff’s office about the 
allegation and that it could not verify the arrest. However, he did not present evidence to 
contradict the information contained in the criminal justice record from the sheriff’s 
office, including a notation that he was incarcerated for four days in October 1994 after 
his arrest. (Tr. 64; GE 7.)  
 
 In 1995 Applicant was arrested for issuing a worthless check. He said his 
girlfriend “emptied my bank account,” which caused the problem. (Tr. 68.) He said he 
spent two days in jail and was released. (Tr. 69.) In 1996 Applicant pled guilty to 
carrying a concealed weapon, possessing a controlled substance, and driving on a 
suspended license. He pled guilty to the felony weapons charge, and was sentenced to 
14 days of confinement, and placed on probation for four years. (GE 3.) In 1998 he was 
charged with carrying a concealed weapon (a knife) and domestic violence. He was 
found guilty of the weapons charge, a felony, and sentenced to 24 months of 
confinement. (Tr. 74-76; GE 3.) In 2011 he was arrested for issuing a check for 
insufficient funds. He posted a bond. (GE 7.) In 2012 he pled guilty to issuing a check 
for insufficient funds. He was sentenced to a day in jail, and ordered to pay costs and 
$1,800 in restitution. He was placed on probation for 12 months. (GE 7.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his SF-85P, he did not disclose the 2012 bankruptcy 
or any of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, including a 2014 automobile 
repossession or six judgments that were entered between 2007 and 2010. He did not 
disclose his arrests in 2011 and 2012 for writing checks for insufficient funds, or the 
conviction for the 2012 offense. He failed to disclose his arrests and convictions for the 
weapons charges from 1996 and 1998, both felonies. He stated he did not “intentionally 
try to deceive the Government.” (Tr. 96.) 
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant said he did not disclose his financial problems because his supervisor 
was “trying to rush us through” the process. (Tr. 85.) He also knew that he had medical 
debts but did not think he needed to disclose those. (Tr. 85.) He was not at home when 
he worked on completing the application, and did not have enough time at work. He 
said that he disclosed the 2012 bankruptcy, but had trouble with the computer recording 
it. He said he would never hide a bankruptcy. (Tr. 89.) He said he signed the application 
four times before it could be electronically submitted, and that the system had many 
computer problems. (Tr. 86-89.)  
 
 Applicant said he made a mistake by not disclosing the felonies because he 
thought the question required disclosure of incidents that were within the past ten years. 
(Tr. 78.) He said he did not remember the 2011 or 2012 check writing offenses, so he 
did not disclose them. (Tr. 81.) Applicant said that he “didn’t purposely try to lie to the 
Government . . . that was never my intent.” (Tr. 83.)  
 
In April 2014 a government investigator interviewed Applicant about his 
background, delinquent debts, and criminal history. Applicant said he would try to pay 
many of the debts by May 2015. (GE 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems that dates back to before he filed his 
2012 bankruptcy. Subsequently, he has accumulated additional delinquent debts that 
he has been unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence raises both of the above 
trustworthiness concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began prior to his filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2012 and continue into the present. The evidence does not support the application of 
AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant provided some evidence that his financial problems arose as a 
result of a period of unemployment and as a consequence of medical problems that 
were not covered by insurance. While those circumstances may have been beyond his 
control, he did not provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances, 
a factor that must be considered in establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Thus, this 
mitigating condition has little application to any debts.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit or financial 
counseling, or has a budget and reasonable plan to systematically address the debts. 
AG ¶ 20(c) has no application because there are no clear indications that his financial 
problems are under control. Applicant submitted no proof that he made a good-faith 
effort to pay or resolve any of the 15 debts, including the smallest debt for only $7. 
Thus, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant successfully 
disputed any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses. 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal incidents, which includes offenses in 1994, 
1995, 1996, 1998, 2011, and 2012. The evidence raises concerns under the above 
disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
The first criminal allegation in the SOR documents an offense in 1994, and the 
last offense occurred in 2012, which resulted in the court placing Applicant on probation 
for 12 months. Given that history and recency of that last offense, there is insufficient 
evidence to determine that similar incidents will not recur in the future and establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a). While Applicant displayed remorse over these incidents, 
he did not provide documentation that he successfully completed his last probation, 
evidence of a good employment record, or constructive community involvement. Hence, 
evidence of mitigation under AG ¶ 32(b) is minimal. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant’s assertion that he disclosed the 2012 bankruptcy in the SF-85P, but 
that he had difficulty with the software program while working on the form, is credible. 
SOR ¶ 3(a) is found in his favor. The remaining allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3(b) though 3(g) 
are not found in his favor. Applicant did not disclose any delinquent debt, judgment, or 
criminal incident in the SF-85P. His explanation for not disclosing the information, 
namely that he was too rushed or misread the questions, is not sufficiently credible.    
 
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
arising under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Although Applicant discussed many of the SOR allegations during his interview, 
there is insufficient evidence to conclude that he made an effort to correct the omissions 
before that interview. Because Applicant did not disclose any negative information about 
his financial delinquencies or criminal problems in the January 2014 SF-85P, his 
conduct cannot be considered minor or in the past. Mitigation is not established under 
AG ¶¶ 17(a) or (c). Applicant stated that his employer is aware of this proceeding, 
having read the SOR. That disclosure provides some evidence that he has taken a step 
to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation regarding the trustworthiness concerns raised 
under this guideline. AG ¶ 17(e) has limited application. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent man, 
who honorably served this country for three years before suffering a medical injury. 
Since 2013 he has worked for a defense contractor. As a consequence of various 
medical conditions, he accumulated debts in 2006, 2010, and more recently in 2015, 
which he has not resolved as a result of insufficient money or efforts. While those 
medical conditions were serious and affected his employment, he did not provide any 
evidence that he made an effort to resolve any of the 15 debts, including the $7 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. His debts, coupled with a history of criminal incidents and failure to 
disclose those problems to the Government, raise questions about his reliability and 
judgment.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, the record evidence leaves doubt as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising under the 
guidelines for financial considerations, criminal conduct, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.f:      Against Applicant 
 
 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:       For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.b through 3.g:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
