 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-06676 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On January 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
Applicant, and it recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether her clearance should be continued.  
 
2 
 
 
On February 19, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 13, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 20, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On April 22, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 28, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant called two 
witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were 
received into evidence without objection. I held the record open until June 12, 2015, to 
afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted AE H through AE Q, which were received into evidence without objection. 
On June 5, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In her SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with 
explanations except for SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 1.s. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old information system security officer employed by a 
defense contractor since September 2014. She seeks to retain her secret security 
clearance as a condition of her continued employment. Applicant has held a secret 
security clearance since February 2008. (GE 1; Tr. 21-24, 50-51)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1994. She was awarded a 
bachelor of arts degree in communications and psychology in July 2004, and a master 
of science degree in management information systems in May 2010. She also began 
a second master of science degree in information assurance engineering and has 
“about four or five classes to finish a second Master’s [degree].” (GE 1, Tr. 24-26) 
 
Applicant married in May 2002, separated in 2006, and divorced in April 2007. 
She has sole custody of two sons, ages 12 and 10, from that marriage. Since 2012, 
Applicant’s former husband has been serving a five-year prison sentence for drug-
related charges. Her former husband’s child support history was sporadic after their 
divorce and ceased altogether when he went to prison. Applicant did not serve in the 
armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 18-19, 27-31) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 19 debts ranging from a $63 cable bill collection account 
to a $100,704 foreclosure deficiency balance. Nine of those debts are student loan 
collection accounts, which constitute Applicant’s most significant financial liability. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.s)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s financial problems can be traced to her 2007 divorce and 
subsequent fallout that included the cost of divorce, erratic child support, and 
ultimately no child support as a result of her former husband going to prison. In August 
2012, she was wrongfully terminated from her former employer and was unemployed 
three months. After being wrongfully terminated, she retained counsel and settled with 
her former employer. (SOR answer; Tr. 15-20) 
 
The following summarizes the status of each SOR debt:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Mortgage foreclosure deficiency balance in the amount of 
$100,704. Home sold in 2008/2009 and Applicant’s latest credit reports reflect a zero 
balance owed. DEBT RESOLVED. (SOR answer; GE 4; AE M - AE O; Tr. 31-36) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, .1g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k –  Department of Education 
collection accounts for student loans in the respective amounts of $20,369, $15,080, 
$13,930, $13,130, $11,753, $9,678, $5,391, $3,919, and $1,971. One-third of 
Applicant’s student loans have been rehabilitated and are in forbearance as a result of 
her having made payments on them. Applicant has submitted the required paperwork 
to rehabilitate the remainder of her student loans and is awaiting a decision. DEBTS 
BEING RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE J, AE K, AE L; Tr. 36-39)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $3,315. Applicant 
provided evidence that she has been engaged in an ongoing good-faith effort to 
resolve this account. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (SOR answer; Tr. 39-40) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $1,023. Applicant 
has made payment arrangements with this creditor and is current on this account. 
DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE E; Tr. 40-41) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $842. Applicant 
has made payment arrangements with this creditor and is current on this account. 
DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE F; Tr. 41) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n – Credit card collection account in the amount of $709. Applicant 
has made payment arrangements with this creditor and is current on this account. 
DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE G; Tr. 41-43) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o – Credit card collection account in the amount of $582. Applicant 
has made payment arrangements with this creditor and is current on this account. 
DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE F; Tr. 41-43) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.p – Past-due medical bill in the amount of $539. Applicant has filed an 
on-line dispute challenging the amount owed, and results are pending. DEBT BEING 
RESOLVED. (SOR answer; Tr. 43-44) 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.q – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $6,652. Applicant 
did not recognize this debt and filed an on-line dispute challenging its validity, and the 
debt no longer appears on her credit report. DEBT RESOLVED. (SOR answer; GE 2, 
GE 4; AE M – AE O; Tr. 44-46) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.r – Collection credit card account in the amount of $11,263. This is a 
credit card debt that arose during Applicant’s previous marriage. Applicant provided 
evidence that she has been engaged in an ongoing good-faith effort to resolve this 
account. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (SOR answer; Tr. 46-47) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.s – Collection cable company account in the amount of $63. Applicant 
did not recognize this debt and filed an on-line dispute challenging its validity, and the 
debt no longer appears on her credit report. DEBT RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE M 
– AE O, Tr. 47-48) 
  
 Applicant retained the services of a financial counselor, who submitted a letter 
outlining a comprehensive strategy for Applicant to regain financial responsibility. 
Applicant’s financial counselor reported that Applicant has followed her 
recommendations to include signing up for a credit monitoring service. (Tr. 48-50; AE 
K, AE Q) Applicant’s monthly budget reflects that she had a net monthly remainder of 
$1,560, leads a modest lifestyle, and is living within her means. (Tr. 51-56; AE P) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted three reference letters from professional and personal 
sources, and a recent performance evaluation. The collective sense of these 
documents is very favorable regarding her character, work performance, reliability, 
and accomplishments. (Tr. 54-55; AE A – AE D) Applicant also volunteers with a non-
profit organization that develops well-rounded athletes. She participates with this 
organization as a parent primarily to ensure that her two sons have a positive role 
models and a constructive outlet while their father is in prison. (Tr. 58-62) 
 
 Applicant’s two witnesses provided very favorable comments regarding her 
character, work ethic, honesty, and reliability. Both witnesses hold active security 
clearances and recommended that Applicant’s security clearance be continued. (Tr. 
63-73)  
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
 
5 
 
 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                   Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. 
 
7 
 
 
Her debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 
01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives partial credit under 
AG ¶ 20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur 
and her behavior does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant experienced a costly 
divorce and a wrongful termination. Furthermore she could not have foreseen that her 
husband would be sent to prison after their divorce and that she would be solely 
responsible for supporting her two sons.  During this time, Applicant remained in 
contact with her creditors; however, was unable to repay them because she simply did 
not have the money.  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are fully applicable. Applicant retained the 
services of a financial counselor, who has provided her with specific recommendations 
to regain financial responsibility. Those recommendations include contacting her 
creditors and setting up payment plans, or disputing debts that are either incorrect or 
not valid. Apart from her SOR debts, Applicant is current on her other debts. She has 
either sufficiently explained, resolved, or refuted her remaining debts.1  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether she maintained contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep her debts current. 
 
8 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s seven years of employment in the defense industry weighs heavily 
in her favor. She is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. She is 
current on her day-to-day expenses, lives within her means, and her SOR debts have 
been resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element 
in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts have either been or are being resolved. Due to circumstances 
beyond her control, her debts became delinquent. Despite her financial setback, it is 
clear from Applicant’s actions that she is on the road to a full financial recovery. While 
her financial situation is not ideal, Applicant’s efforts to date demonstrate that she is 
doing her level best to regain financial responsibility. These factors show 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered the circumstances that led to 
her financial difficulties, her ongoing financial recovery, the steps she has taken to 
resolve her financial situation, her potential for future service as a defense contractor, 
the mature and responsible manner in which she dealt with her situation, her 
reference letters, and her testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
 
9 
 
 
whole person, I conclude she has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
 Applicant understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. Her efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident she will resolve her remaining debts 
and maintain her financial responsibility.2    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to s:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through 
credit reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar 
the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to 
reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct 
having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). 
Violation of a promise made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns 
under Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge 
does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-
06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority 
to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have 
a security clearance while she works on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this 
Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
