 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05836 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant accumulated $143,600 in 
delinquent debt as a result of a series of events beyond her control. However, despite 
having significant assets at her disposal, the delinquent accounts remain unresolved. 
Applicant’s promise to pay the delinquent accounts in the future does not mitigate the 
security concern. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on August 11, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted AE G through H, which were also admitted without objection.3 I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on August 20, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 71, is self-employed. Since 2008, she has worked on a contract for a 
federal contractor. Although she does not require a security clearance for her current 
contract, the federal contractor is sponsoring Applicant’s security clearance application 
in anticipation of future work that may require Applicant to access or handle classified 
information. Applicant submitted a security clearance application in May 2013. She 
disclosed 11 delinquent accounts totaling $186,200, including the past-due mortgage on 
her primary residence. The ensuing investigation confirmed the debts disclosed by 
Applicant. The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to eight creditors for $143,600.4 
 
 Relying on their respective expertise and experience in running a small business 
and in the real estate industry, Applicant and her husband decided to invest in real 
estate as a vehicle for retirement savings. They purchased their primary residence in 
1990, a second home in 1998, and four investment properties in 2006. They sold one of 
the investment properties in 2007 and held the three remaining investment properties as 
rental units. Applicant and her husband were able to manage their personal and 
investment-related financial obligations, including mortgages on the properties, until 
2008.5 
 
 The 2008 collapse of the national real estate market had a significant impact on 
Applicant’s finances.  Applicant’s husband lost his job as a mortgage broker and has not 
worked since. Their real estate portfolio lost significant value. They began having 
difficulty renting the three investment properties and experienced a significant decrease 
in rental income. The rental properties were no longer self-sustaining. Between 2010 
and 2011, Applicant experienced health problems that prevented her from working 
regularly, resulting in the loss of several contracts. The cumulative effect of these 
events caused Applicant to have difficulty meeting her financial obligations. The 
mortgage on Applicant’s primary residence became delinquent and she began to rely 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) IIII. 
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE IV.  
 
4 Tr. 21-24, 31; GE 1, 3-5. 
 
5 Tr. 25, 35-37; AE G.  
 
3 
 
heavily on credit cards. In 2010, Applicant and her husband decided to stop paying their 
credit cards.6  
 
 Between 2011 and 2012, Applicant and her husband sold the three investment 
properties at a cumulative loss of $229,000. In 2012, Applicant was able to modify her 
home mortgage. She paid off all of her debts under $10,000, though she did not specify 
either the identity or the number of accounts paid. Applicant’s income has also 
rebounded. She now earns between $85,000 and $100,000 annually and remains the 
couple’s only source of income.  However, she has not made significant progress in 
addressing the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. To date, Applicant is only making 
payments of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, paying $100 a month on the account since 
2013. During her July 2013 subject interview, Applicant stated her intent to resolve her 
delinquent debts with the proceeds from the sale of her primary residence. According to 
a popular real estate database, Applicant’s home has appreciated to four times its 
purchase price. Applicant believes she has between $500,000 and $800,000 in equity in 
the home.  At hearing, Applicant reiterated this plan. She anticipates listing the home for 
sale sometime in 2016.7 
 
 In addition to the equity in her primary residence, Applicant has approximately 
$228,000 in equity in her second home, and $9,000 in cash savings. Applicant testified 
that she is able to live within her means and can meet her recurring financial 
obligations.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
6 Tr. 33-34, 64-66. 
 
7Tr. 29-31, 44, 47-61, 66-70; GE 2; AE F-G.  
 
8 Tr. 27-28, 72; AE H. 
 
4 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”9 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.10 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,11 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make her 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.12  
 
Applicant began experiencing financial problems in 2008, when the loss of 
earned and rental income affected her ability to pay her bills. As a result, she stopped 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
11 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989) 
  
 
5 
 
paying her credit cards in 2010.  Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in the 
record establish the Government’s prima facie case. The record supports a finding that 
Applicant has a history of not paying her bills and having an inability to do so.13 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events beyond her control, but her 
actions to date do not support a finding of full mitigation of the financial considerations 
concern. Although Applicant acted responsibly by disposing of her investment 
properties, she still has appreciable assets that she has not used to resolve her 
outstanding delinquent debt.  
 
In order to mitigate the financial considerations concerns an Applicant is not 
required to be debt free. All that is required is that Applicant has a plan to reduce her 
delinquent debt and that she has taken steps to effectuate that plan. Here, Applicant 
has offered a plan, contingent on the future sale of her primary residence, to repay her 
delinquent accounts. This future promise to pay her delinquent debts, however well 
intentioned, is not sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
Applicant did not present a positive track record of debt repayment or reduction. Her 
current ability to live within her means and to timely pay her recurring financial 
obligations does not resolve the issue. Because the delinquent debts in the SOR remain 
unresolved, Applicant’s financial problems are considered ongoing and, consequently, 
her finances are not under control.  
 
After reviewing the record, I find that Applicant is not suitable for access to 
classified information at this time. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered 
the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). An adverse finding in this case is not a finding 
that Applicant does not possess the good character required of those entrusted with 
access to classified information. Even good people can pose a security risk because of 
facts and circumstances not entirely under their control.14 Here, Applicant’s financial 
problems were not caused by irresponsible financial habits or a reckless investment and 
business plan, but market forces and health issues beyond her control. This decision 
should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the 
type of financial stability necessary to obtain a security clearance in the future. Rather, it 
is recognition of the fact that financial issues have historically been a motivating factor 
behind acts of espionage. The award of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. While a favorable decision is not warranted at this time, in the 
future, she may well present persuasive evidence of debt reduction and repayment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
14 ISCR Case No.01-26893 at 8 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002); See also Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 527-28 (1988). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f, 1.h:    Against Applicant  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
