 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04883 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from October 2010 to 
January 2014. He continues to associate with his marijuana-using friends. His period of 
abstinence, in light of the record evidence, is insufficient to mitigate the drug 
involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 29, 2014. 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) on January 22, 2015.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015. The Defense Office 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 20, 2015, 
scheduling a hearing for August 19, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits (GE 1 and 2). Applicant 
testified and submitted three documents (AE 1 through 3). All exhibits were admitted 
without objection and made part of the record. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on August 27, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR - that he used marijuana 
with varying frequency between about October 2010 and January 2014. His admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old image scientist employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2014. He attended college from September 2010 through December 
2013, and received his bachelor’s degree in imaging science in June 2014. He has 
never been married, and he does not have any children. He has never held a security 
clearance, and he does not require a security clearance to retain his current 
employment.  
 
 Applicant claimed that he first illegally used marijuana in October 2010, when he 
was 18 years old. Applicant stated that when he began attending college, he suffered 
from symptoms of depression, anxiety, and sleep apnea caused by concussions he 
suffered while playing sports. He averred that he received some commercial 
prescription products; however, they were ineffective at alleviating his symptoms. His 
marijuana-using friends recommended he try marijuana. After doing some medical 
research online, Applicant concluded marijuana might help with his symptoms.  
 
Applicant’s primary method of marijuana consumption was vaporization. From 
October 2010 to January 2011, Applicant used marijuana once every two months for 
help with his symptoms. In December 2010, Applicant received another concussion 
while playing ultimate Frisbee; his symptoms became worse; and he increased the 
frequency of marijuana use up to three times a week. From April 2012 through August 
2012, he did not use marijuana because he was worried about being drug-tested in his 
internship with a large corporation. When he returned to college in August 2012, he 
resumed his marijuana use at a rate of about three times a week until April 2013. 
Between April 2013 and September 2013, he did not use marijuana because he was 
worried about being drug-tested in his internship with a large corporation. (Tr. 27-28) In 
September 2013, he reduced his marijuana use to one time every two months until 
December 21, 2013. (GE 2, Tr. 47)  
 
 Applicant sought help with his symptoms of anxiety and problems sleeping from 
a doctor of nurse practice (psychopharmacologist). On March 29, 2013, he obtained a 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
prescription for marijuana, which is permitted under state law. His prescription expired 
on March 29, 2014, and it was not valid in a different state where he attended college. 
He began an internship with a defense contractor, his current employer, shortly after 
receiving his medical marijuana prescription, and he stopped using marijuana during his 
internship from April to September 2013.  
 
Applicant returned to college in August 2013, and he used marijuana three times 
from September to December 21, 2013. His most recent marijuana use was on 
December 21, 2013, and he does not intend to use marijuana in the future. He ended 
his marijuana use because he no longer needed it to sleep, and his other symptoms 
have abated.  
 
In total over the October 2010 to January 2014 period, Applicant used marijuana 
about 200 times. He used a gram of marijuana every four of five months in his 
vaporizer. Most of the time, he used marijuana shortly before going to bed to help him 
sleep. It helped him to relax and feel calm and tired. On occasion, he would use 
marijuana for recreational purposes.  
 
Applicant has contact with two or three of his college marijuana-using friends 
once every two months via text messaging and the internet. He continues to meet in 
person with them about twice a year. Applicant testified that his friends still use 
marijuana in front of him, but with his permission. His friends “are very respectful of [his] 
situation with a security clearance and [his] job.” (Tr. 49, 58) Applicant works in a drug-
free workplace; however, he has not been tested for drug use with urinalysis. He has 
never been arrested for a drug offense. He disclosed his drug use on his January 29, 
2014 SCA, and discussed his marijuana use in detail with an investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). (GE 1, 2) He has not received any drug 
rehabilitation treatment or counseling. (Tr. 56) 
 
The director of Applicant’s company believes that Applicant has demonstrated 
maturity, competency, trustworthiness, and a “consistently high level of integrity.” In his 
opinion, Applicant has “established himself as an essential member of the [DOD 
contractor’s] team.” He is conscientious, focused, detail-oriented, responsible, and 
reliable. Applicant’s efforts contributed to successful completion of a major contract, and 
he has excellent potential to contribute to the national defense. The director’s letter 
does not indicate whether he is aware of Applicant’s history of illegal marijuana use and 
continuing association with marijuana users. (AE 1) 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
abuse;”2 and “(c) illegal drug possession.” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply because 
Applicant used marijuana about 200 times from October 2010 to December 2013.3 He 
possessed marijuana before he used it. Consideration of mitigating conditions is 
required.  
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Considering the evidence as a whole, in this particular case, I find that the 
passage of time so far is insufficient to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. 
Applicant’s marijuana-using friends recommended he tried marijuana to alleviate his 
symptoms. He used marijuana frequently between October 2010 and January 2014. He 
knew that using marijuana was illegal and a concern to prospective employers because 
he stopped using marijuana during his two internships. He was concerned about testing 
positive for the use of drug. Notwithstanding, after the internships he continued his 
marijuana use. His most recent use of marijuana occurred weeks before he started 
working for his current employer in January 2014. He recognized the adverse impact on 
his career future drug use will have because he is employed by a DOD contractor that 
has a requirement for a drug-free workplace. AG ¶ 26(a) does not fully apply and does 
not mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Applicant testified that he suffered from symptoms of depression, anxiety, and 
sleep apnea caused by concussions he suffered. He claimed that he sought the 
assistance of medical professionals to deal with his symptoms and had to resort to the 
use of an illegal substance. He presented no documentary evidence of any medical 
treatment he received using conventional, legal medications to address his medical 
problems. Nor did he present evidence of a recent diagnosis and prognosis concerning 
his medical condition, or a possible addiction to marijuana. Considering the period 
during which he used marijuana, and the frequency of his use, questions remain as to 
whether Applicant’s marijuana abuse could recur.  
 
Applicant averred that he has not used marijuana since January 2014. He 
promised to continue to abstain from drug possession and use. However, Applicant has 
not disassociated from his drug-using associates and contacts. His marijuana-using 
friends still use marijuana in his presence, albeit with Applicant’s permission. Moreover, 
he did not provide a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. He did not provide proof 
of satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including 
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.    
 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 23-year-old imaging engineer employed by a defense contractor since January 
2014. There is no evidence of criminal conduct or of violations of his employer’s rules 
unrelated to his marijuana abuse, or that he used illegal drugs after obtaining 
employment with the DOD contractor.  
 
The director of Applicant’s company lauded Applicant’s maturity, competency, 
trustworthiness, integrity, reliability, responsible behavior, and contributions to the DOD 
contractor. In his opinion, Applicant has strong potential to contribute to the national 
defense. 
 
I considered that the only evidence of marijuana use is his admissions on his 
2014 SCA, to an OPM investigator, in his SOR response, and at his hearing. His 
primary reason for using marijuana was to help him with symptoms of sleeplessness 
and anxiety while he was in college. In 2013, his symptoms and marijuana use were 
greatly reduced, and he has about 18 months of abstinence from marijuana use.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant has not disassociated from his drug-using friends who 
still use marijuana in his presence, and he did not provide a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. Applicant’s current association 
with marijuana-using friends raises questions about his judgment and his ability and 
willingness to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. On balance, the passage of 
time so far is insufficient to establish a track record of no drug abuse, and that he 
possesses the judgment to alleviate the security concerns. Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
