 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06293 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On April 1, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and she elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 5, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on September 23, 2015. Applicant was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant objected to certain parts of Item 6 and provided additional 
corrected information. Government Items 4 through 8 are admitted into evidence, with 
the noted changes to Item 6. Applicant provided additional documents that are marked 
as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 13, and were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on October 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations I have 
incorporated her admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. She married in 1997 and has two sons ages 16 and 7. 
She has been employed with the same federal contractor since October 2008, but 
experienced a temporary lay-off from March 2011 to June 2011. During this period, she 
received unemployment compensation. From 2003 she has been consistently 
employed.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent or past-due debts. Ten of the debts were in 
collection or charged-off status (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, and l.l through 
1.m; cumulative total of $17,680). SOR ¶ 1.e (balance $19,328) was past due $977; 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,501) was past due $343, and SOR ¶ 1.k ($6,041) was past due $590. 
Applicant paid through an installment plan the 2011 tax debt in SOR¶ 1.m ($2,200). In 
August 2015, she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($489).2 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to a period from March to June 2011 
when she was temporarily laid off due to a government shutdown; her younger son’s 
medical issues; and a period of separation with her husband from June 2011 to 
November 2011.3  
 
 In January 2015, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and included debts listed 
in the SOR. Under Schedule F-Creditors holding unsecured nonpriority claims, she 
listed 25 claimants with accounts totaling approximately $63,997. This included a 
student loan, several personal loans from a credit union and bank, medical debts, a 
veterinarian bill, insurance debt, pest control services, and the deficiency owed on a 
repossessed vehicle.  
 
 As required for bankruptcy filings, Applicant completed credit counseling. She 
stated that she gained valuable insight into managing her finances. She also indicated 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 AE 13. 
 
3 AE 1 and 2. 
 
3 
 
 
that she took a 13-week course with a nationally recognized financial education 
program. It is noted from information in the bankruptcy petition that Applicant and her 
husband’s joint income in 2013 was $83,347, and it increased to $97,673 in 2014. They 
currently own two vehicles with loans of $7,781 and $22,842. Applicant’s debts were 
discharged through bankruptcy in June 2015. 
 
Applicant provided information that her monthly rent was reduced from $1,500 to 
$996. She also provided information to show as of September 2015, her average 
balance in her checking account is $3,364, and her savings account average balance is 
$1,198. She indicated that she is current on all of her accounts and has not added new 
debts.4 
 
 Applicant provided character letters. In them she is described as hardworking, 
diligent, determined, organized, knowledgeable, dependable, professional, trustworthy, 
and honest. She is actively involved in her church and community. Her performance 
appraisals rate her in various categories as “fully successful,” “highly successful,” or 
“exceptional.” Applicant has earned various awards and recognitions.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
4 Items 5, 8, and 14. 
 
5 AE 10, 11, and 12. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant had 13 delinquent debts that were in collection, charged off, or past 
due that were unresolved. Applicant was unable or unwilling to satisfy her debts in the 
past. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts. Through an installment agreement, she 
resolved the tax debt owed for tax year 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.m), and in August 2015 she paid 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. The remaining debts and others not alleged totaling 
approximately $63,000 were discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2015.  
 
 Applicant indicated that her financial problems were the result of being 
temporarily laid off in 2011 for several months, her son’s health issues, and her marital 
separation in 2011. These were conditions beyond her control. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
did not provide information of what responsible actions she took to resolve her debts 
prior to filing bankruptcy. Applicant and her husband’s income increased from 2013 to 
2014, yet she did not pay her creditors. Having her debts resolved through bankruptcy 
is a legal recourse to allow her to start over. However, Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient information to show what tangible actions she took from 2011 when she began 
to experience financial difficulties until she filed bankruptcy. She resumed employment 
in 2011 and has been employed steadily. She and her husband reconciled in November 
2011, thereby reducing the financial impact of the previous separation. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to conclude that her 
financial problem were the result of unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur. I 
find Ag ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as part of her bankruptcy and also 
participated in a 13-week financial education course. It has only been five months since 
Applicant had her debts discharged. There is no track record of financial stability or of 
her living within her means. It is too early to conclude that there are clear indications 
that she will be fiscally responsible in the future. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Discharge 
of delinquent debts through bankruptcy does not constitute a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant did not dispute any of the 
alleged debts, so AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. She has been steadily employed except for a period in 
2011. She and her husband were separated and reconciled the same year. Applicant 
experienced financial difficulties during this time. She did not sufficiently articulate what 
actions she took during and after this time to ensure her debts were paid. Although she 
stated she has participated in financial education, it is too soon to decide if she will 
adhere to a fiscally responsible strategy. With a clean financial slate after her debts 
were discharged, she may in time be able to show a consistent reliable track record of 
financial stability, but at this juncture it is too soon make that definitive determination. 
Her financial problems raise questions about her trustworthiness, reliability, and good 
judgment. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.l  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.n:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
