1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------------, a/k/a ) ISCR Case No. 14-03086
---------------------------------------------- )
           )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Doris J. Dabrowski, Esq. 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. A 57-year-old engineer, Applicant is a native-
born citizen of Iran who immigrated to the United States in 1978 and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1992. He has strong and long-standing family, employment,
and financial ties to the United States. But those ties do not outweigh and overcome the
security concern stemming from his family ties to Iran, a country that is hostile to the
United States. In addition, his possession and use of an Iranian passport during
1998–2013 are problematic. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
 Exhibit 1 (for ease of understanding, it will be referred to as a security clearance application or simply an1
application). 
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
 Tr. 23–43; Exhibits A, B, and I. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on June 14, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
(DOD),  on February 17, 2015, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining2
it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline B
for foreign influence and Guideline C for foreign preference. He answered the SOR in
writing on March 3, 2015, and he requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on July 8, 2015. The hearing was held as
scheduled on July 28, 2015. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on August
5, 2015.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security clearance
for the first time. His educational background includes earning a bachelor’s degree in
engineering from a U.S. university in 1983. He has been employed by a technology and
communications company since 2010. Based on the testimony of two witnesses and
documentary evidence, he has a good if not outstanding employment record.   4
1. Applicant’s background in Iran and immigration to the United States
Applicant was born in Iran and raised in a large family, the oldest of nine children,
although one of his sisters is now deceased. He completed high school in Iran in 1977.
He immigrated to the United States on a student visa in 1978, and he studied for his
engineering degree during 1978–1983. He stated that after the 1979 Iranian revolution,
 Tr. 48–49. 5
 Tr. 49–50; Exhibits G and H. 6
 Exhibit 1 at page 21 of 75. 7
 Exhibit J. 8
3
he concluded that he could not return to Iran and live under the ruling regime.  He also5
stated that he considered formally renouncing his Iranian citizenship, but after looking
into the matter he determined the requirements for doing so were too impractical and
burdensome.6
Applicant was allowed to remain in the country for one year after his graduation.
During that time he found employment and married a native-born U.S. citizen whom he
had dated while a college student. He and his wife have remained married to this day. 
2. Applicant’s family ties to Iran and the United States  
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1992. His most recent U.S.
passport was issued to him in 2011. Applicant and his wife did not have children, but
they did serve as foster parents for five children over a period of years. Based on her
marriage to an Iranian-born citizen, Applicant’s wife obtained Iranian citizenship and an
Iranian passport in 2012 to facilitate travel to Iran to visit Applicant’s family.  To date,7
she has not traveled to Iran. Applicant and his wife bought their current home for about
$600,000 in 2013.8
Applicant’s father is deceased, having passed away several years ago.
Applicant’s mother is now more than 90 years old. As one would imagine with nine
children, she was a stay-at-home mother who was responsible for managing the
household while her husband was a career military officer in the Iranian Army, retiring
many years ago (before 1979) at the rank of colonel. Based on his military service,
Applicant’s mother continues to receive a monthly pension payment, which is
supplemented by financial support from her numerous children. 
Applicant has three sisters who are citizens of and residents in Iran, and four
siblings are in the United States. Of those three sisters, two were educated in the United
States and then returned to Iran. The first sister recently received a so-called green
card, and she intends to travel to the United States to join her husband, daughters, and
grandchildren. The second sister is the primary caregiver to her elderly mother. She is
also retired from a career working as an auditor for the Iranian tax authority. The third
sister is the secondary caregiver to her elderly mother, and she has lived with her
husband and had three children. In addition to his three sisters, Applicant has an
extended family in Iran.  
Applicant has regular (once per week or once every other week) telephone
conversations with the sister who is the primary caregiver and less frequent
 Tr. 69. 9
 Tr. 53. 10
 Tr. 81–82. 11
 Exhibit F. 12
 Exhibit C. 13
 Exhibit D. 14
4
conversations with his other two sisters. He also has telephone conversations with his
mother, although they are often one-sided conversations.  
Applicant stated that during the 37 years he has lived and worked in the United
States, no Iranian authorities or officials have contacted him or his family members in an
effort to determine his activities in the United States.  Likewise, during his four trips to9
Iran (discussed below), he has never been contacted by Iranian authorities or officials,
nor has he experienced any problems or difficulties while in Iran.  10
Applicant has three sisters and one brother who are citizens of and residents in
the United States. He also has several nieces and nephews in the United States. His
three sisters and one brother immigrated to the United States from Iran and became
naturalized U.S. citizens. Applicant has regular (weekly) telephone conversations with
his U.S. siblings, and he also speaks frequently to his various nieces and nephews. 
3. Applicant’s possession and use of an Iranian passport 
After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant possessed and used an Iranian passport
to travel to Iran on four occasions in 1998, 2006, 2011, and 2013.  His trip in 1998 was11
the first time he returned to Iran since departing there in 1978. His trip in 2006 was due
to the passing of his father. His trips in 2011 and 2013 were to visit his mother and
sisters. The Iranian passports are apparently valid for five years, as his most recent
Iranian passport was issued in May 2011 with an expiration date of May 2016.  Other12
than those four trips, Applicant has used his U.S. passport for all other foreign travel.
In April 2013, a few months before he completed his security clearance
application, Applicant surrendered the Iranian passport to his company’s facility security
officer (FSO).  The FSO agreed to hold the passport until termination of Applicant’s13
employment or until Applicant requested return of the passport. 
In July 2015, shortly before the hearing in this case, Applicant instructed his
company’s FSO to destroy the Iranian passport and provide a statement attesting to its
destruction.  The FSO destroyed the passport as requested and provided Applicant a14
copy of the front pages (containing his photograph, identifying information, and place of
 Exhibits E and F. 15
 Tr. 90.16
 Tr. 96–97. 17
 Tr. 97. 18
 Exhibits J and K. 19
 Exhibit 3.  20
5
issue) and the last pages (containing entry and exit stamps from his trips to Iran in 2011
and 2012) of the passport.15
Concerning future use of an Iranian passport, Applicant’s feels a sense of
obligation to his mother, and he expressed a degree of uncertainty whether he would
travel to Iran when his mother passes away.  At the same time, he expressed16
willingness not to make the trip.  He further stated that if he did travel to Iran, he would17
report his actions to security officials.  18
4. Applicant’s financial interests in Iran and the United States
Applicant has no financial, business, or pecuniary interests in Iran, and all such
interests are in the United States. He has a potential future interest as one of several
beneficiaries of his mother’s estate, but he stated that he intends to gift it to his sister
who is the primary caregiver to his mother. Applicant and his wife have enjoyed
successful careers in their chosen fields of work. In addition to their earned incomes,
they have a net worth in excess of $2 million.   19
5. Applicant’s credibility during the hearing
Applicant was businesslike, polite, and respectful throughout the hearing, and he
answered questions in an open and honest way. I was favorably impressed by
Applicant, and I had no concerns about his credibility or truthfulness. 
6. Background information on Iran
Concerning Iran, also known as Persia, officially known as the Islamic Republic
of Iran since 1980, I took administrative notice of the facts as set forth in Department
Counsel’s written request.  The 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran, then a key U.S. ally,20
opened a long and ongoing rift in diplomatic relations between the United States and
Iran. The U.S. Government has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism, and it
has special concerns about four particular areas of Iranian behavior: (1) its efforts to
acquire weapons of mass destruction (e.g., its nuclear program); (2) its support of and
involvement with terrorism; (3) its support of violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process; and (4) its dismal record of human rights. Because Iran does not recognize
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to21
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.22
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 23
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 24
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.26
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.27
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.28
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 29
6
dual citizenship, Iranian-born naturalized U.S. citizens are considered solely Iranian
citizens by Iranian authorities, and they are required to enter and exit Iran using an
Iranian passport. When in Iran, they may be subject to surveillance, search,
harassment, arrest, and detention or imprisonment.
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As21
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt22
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An23
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  24
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting25
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An26
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate27
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  28
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s29
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).30
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.31
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 32
 AG ¶ 6. 33
7
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.30
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it31
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
1. The foreign influence concern
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s family ties to
Iran disqualify him from eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline B
for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt32
due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.33
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s family ties to Iran, I have considered the following disqualifying conditions: 
8
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of a resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information.
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
AG ¶ 8(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
Applicant has multiple indicators of being a mature, responsible, and trustworthy
person. And I found him to be sincere, serious, and credible at the hearing. Due to his
birth in Iran, Applicant remains a citizen of Iran in the eyes of that country,
notwithstanding his departure from there in 1978, his unwillingness to return there after
the 1979 revolution, and his naturalization as a U.S. citizen in 1992. Since his arrival
here, he pursued higher education and worked steadily to improve his position and
station in life. As a member of a large family and extended family residing in both Iran
and the United States, he has regular contact with those family members. Since 1998,
he has made four trips to Iran for family purposes, and (as discussed below) a future trip
to Iran cannot be ruled out. He duly reported his Iranian citizenship, Iranian passport,
travels to Iran, and contacts with Iran in his security clearance application and during his
background investigation. He and his wife have worked hard and enjoyed professional
and financial success, and their wealth is located in the United States. Indeed, Applicant
appears to be a model immigrant who is fully invested in the United States in various
 AG ¶¶ 9, 10, and 11 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 34
 AG ¶ 9.35
 AG ¶ 10(a)(1). 36
 AG ¶ 11(e).37
9
ways (e.g., education, employment, foster children, financial, etc.), and those
circumstances are unlikely to change in the foreseeable future. 
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has obvious family ties to Iran based on his birth in that
country and his immediate family members who live there. Those circumstances require
careful scrutiny because Iran is a country that is hostile to the United States and poses
a serious security concern. With that said, Applicant is a long-time resident and citizen
of the United States, and he has substantial ties to the United States, which includes a
large extended family. In other words, his ties to the United States are strong.
Nevertheless, Iran’s indisputable hostility to the United States and the heightened risk it
creates place a heavy burden on Applicant to show his ties to Iran are mitigated.
Considering the facts and circumstances as a whole, I cannot conclude that it is unlikely
that Applicant will be placed in a position of compromise or conflict in a security
clearance context. The situation in Iran is too uncertain and unstable and risky to reach
that conclusion. 
2. The foreign preference concern
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline C is whether Applicant’s possession
and use of an Iranian passport disqualify him from eligibility for access to classified
information. Under Guideline C for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may34
be questioned or put into doubt due to actions that indicate a foreign preference. The
overall concern is:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.35
Applicant’s possession of an Iranian passport for many years, and his use of it on
four occasions to travel to Iran, is an indication of a foreign preference and a serious
concern.  His most recent Iranian passport was obtained in May 2011 with an36
expiration date of May 2016, he surrendered it to his company’s FSO (although he
could still retrieve it) in April 2013, and he had it destroyed in July 2015, shortly before
the hearing in this case. Those actions constitute mitigating circumstances.37
Nevertheless, I remain concerned about the probability or likelihood that Applicant will
obtain another Iranian passport for travel he deems necessary, such as the passing of
 Because his spouse’s Iranian citizenship and passport were not alleged in the SOR, I considered those38
matters for the lim ited purpose of assessing “the likelihood of continuation or recurrence” of Applicant’s
possession and use of an Iranian passport. Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(a)(9).  
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).39
10
his mother or some other family-related event. At the hearing, he was less than firmly
decided or certain on that point. My concern is heightened by Applicant’s spouse who
obtained an Iranian passport in 2012.  That is an interesting circumstance, and it38
suggests additional travel to Iran is as likely as it is not. Looking forward, I am not
persuaded that Applicant will refrain from exercising his Iranian citizenship by obtaining
another Iranian passport and using it for travel to Iran. Accordingly, Guideline C is
decided against Applicant.    
 
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, the record evidence as a
whole leaves me with doubt about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. In
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Indeed,
Applicant presented evidence that is quite favorable. I also gave due consideration to
the whole-person concept.  Having done so, I conclude that Applicant has not met his39
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
