 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03348 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant did not intentionally falsify 
his February 2013 security clearance application. However, Applicant failed to mitigate 
the financial considerations concerns raised by his history of financial problems. He has 
not demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his debts or a history of financial 
rehabilitation or reform. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations and 
personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on June 4, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted AE D through I, which were also admitted without objection.3 I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 12, 2015. 
 
Procedural Matter 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to correct a clerical error. 
Applicant received notice of the amendment in March 2015. On the original SOR, the 
document set forth a falsification allegation as paragraph 2, without the personal 
conduct introduction paragraph that typically precedes the allegation. The proffered 
amendment sought to correct that error. Applicant reaffirmed his admission of the 
allegation in his answer to the SOR amendment on April 6, 2015. He did not provide 
any additional documentation with his answer to the SOR amendment. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR was granted without objection from 
the Applicant.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 47, has worked for a federal contractor as a program manager since 
January 2013. On his security clearance application, submitted in February 2013, he 
disclosed $68,700 in delinquent debt related to medical bills, consumer credit accounts, 
and an automobile loan. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant is indebted to 
six creditors for $82,800.5  
 
Applicant, who served two tours in the Army and one tour in the Army National 
Guard (ANG), was initially granted a security clearance in 1989. On his February 2013 
security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he may have had a security 
clearance revoked in 1994 while in the Army for failing to disclose a previous marriage. 
Documents from the then U.S. Army Central Adjudication Facility indicates that 
Applicant’s security clearance was revoked in 1996 for his history of illegal drug use and 
the falsification of his 1994 security clearance application. At hearing, Applicant 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) IIII. 
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE IV.  
 
4 The SOR amendment and Applicant’s answer to the SOR amendment are included in the record as HE 
I and II, respectively.   
 
5 Tr. 19-20; GE 1.  
 
3 
 
explained that he disclosed the details of his prior security clearance revocation to the 
best of his recollection.6  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2004. During his last enlistment in the 
ANG, the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) overpaid Applicant $40,000 
due to a misclassification of his duty status. (SOR ¶ 1.a) Between 2004 and 2015, 
Applicant made no efforts to repay the overpayment. In April 2015, Applicant contacted 
DFAS in an effort to make payment arrangements, but has been told there is no way for 
him to repay the debt. Applicant believes the debt is being resolved through the 
recapture of any income tax refund to which he may be entitled. He did not quantify the 
number of tax returns or the amount of money applied to the overpayments through this 
method.7 
 
Applicant’s financial problems became acute after a medical issue kept him out 
of work for 13 months between 2006 and 2007. Without his income as the primary 
earner, Applicant’s household income decreased by 75%. Applicant relied heavily on 
credit cards to meet his financial obligations.  He tried to reduce his expenses by having 
his vehicle voluntarily repossessed.  The deficiency balance on the auto loan is alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b ($24,700). Applicant contacted the creditor to make payment 
arrangements, but the creditor informed Applicant that there is no longer any record of 
the account. The creditor discovered another delinquent account belonging to Applicant 
for $524, which he settled in June 2015 for a reduced balance.8  
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent cell 
phone bill. (SOR 1.d, $2,000) Applicant contacted the creditor to propose a $25 per 
month payment plan to begin June 2015. He did not provide evidence of any payments. 
Using the contact information provided on GE 4, Applicant attempted to contact the 
creditors for the medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($190) and 1.g ($116) to make 
payment arrangements. However, the contact information was invalid and he has not 
been able to make contact with the creditor. The SOR alleges in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($15,985) 
and 1.e ($1,864) that Applicant is indebted to two credit card companies. However, he is 
listed an authorized user on both accounts and is not liable for the outstanding 
balances.9  
 
 Beginning in January 2015, Applicant and his wife attended a nine-week financial 
course. Applicant testified that he is current on all of his recurring bills, except for his 
student loans. In 2012, Applicant began attending school with the belief that he was 
eligible for benefits under the GI bill. After starting school, he learned that the debt he 
owed to DFAS made him ineligible to receive the tuition assistance benefit. Applicant 
borrowed money to complete his education. He paid the loan until 2013 when his father-
                                                          
6 Tr. 19-20, 34-40, 58-65; GE 1, 5. 
 
7 Tr. 21, 25, 41-44. 
 
8 Tr. 21-25, 44-46; AE A-D, I. 
 
9 Tr. 26-31, 46-48; GE 3-4; AE C, E, I.  
 
4 
 
in-law became ill and subsequently died. Applicant believes that he spent $5,000 
providing assistance to his in-laws. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant indicated 
that his student loans are no longer in default. He provided proof of one $100 payment 
made in June 2015. He did not provide details of his long-term payment plan.10 
 
 Applicant provided several character letters from individuals who know Applicant 
through his work as a federal contractor or his work as a part-time sheriff’s deputy. Each 
character reference speaks of Applicant’s honesty and integrity. The letter writers who 
are aware of Applicant’s financial problems do not believe they would be a potential 
source of vulnerability or exploitation.11   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
10 Tr. 50-54; AE A, F-G, I. 
 
11 AE H.  
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”12 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.13 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,14 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.15  
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems beginning in 2004. As the result of a 
DFAS error which resulted in a $40,000 overpayment to Applicant in 2004 and 13 
months of unemployment between 2006 and 2007, Applicant accumulated debt he 
could not pay. To date, the majority of the debts remain unresolved. These facts are 
enough to establish the Government’s prima facie case that Applicant has both a history 
of not paying his debts and an inability to do so.16  
 
The record does not contain sufficient evidence to rebut the financial 
considerations security concerns. Although Applicant’s financial problems were caused 
by events beyond his control, he did not submit sufficient evidence to show that he 
acted responsibly in light of his circumstances. Between 2004 and the hearing in June 
2015, Applicant did not take any steps to resolve his delinquent accounts. The steps he 
has taken in the recent months to address his delinquent accounts do not constitute a 
good-faith effort to resolve his indebtedness. Applicant has not established a meaningful 
track record of debt repayment or financial rehabilitation.  
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 18. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
14 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989) 
  
16 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s current ability to live within his means and his participation in a 
financial management class do not resolve the issue. Because his delinquent debt is 
unresolved, his financial problems are ongoing and, consequently, his finances are not 
under control.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a security concern when he acts in a 
way that raises questions about his judgment or his ability to protect classified 
information.17 The SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified his February 2013 
security clearance application by providing misinformation regarding his security 
clearance revocation in the mid-1990s. While Applicant provided erroneous information 
about the revocation, I find that he did not do so with the intent to deceive the 
Government.  It is not unreasonable that he could not recall the specifics of the 
revocation accurately given that it occurred almost 20 years ago. Applicant properly 
disclosed potentially adverse information on his most recent security clearance 
application. His disclosure provided sufficient notice to the Government of a potentially 
adverse action related to his prior possession of a security clearance.  
 
After reviewing the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The favorable information in the record, regarding 
Applicant’s work performance and good character, is not sufficient to mitigate the 
financial concerns raised in the SOR.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b, 1.d:    Against Applicant  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.e, 1.f -1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLIC ANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
                                                          
17 AG ¶ 15. 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
