                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 14-04594
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding his finances and personal conduct. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of the Case
On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 29, 2014, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 24, 2015, and timely responded to the
FORM with copies of his filed federal tax returns for tax years 2012, 2013, and 2014
and endorsements from friends and a former colleague who know him. The
Government’s submissions are admitted as Items 1-4, and Applicant’s submissions are
admitted as Items 5-10. The case was assigned to me on September 8, 2015. Applicant
has since documented his filing of his 2009 state tax return as well. This submission is
accepted as Applicant’s Item 11.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to file his federal income tax
returns for at least tax year 2009 and (b)  failed to file his state income tax returns for at
least tax year 2009. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his security clearance application
of January 2014 by answering “no” to Section 26, which inquired whether he had failed
to file any federal or state tax return within the last seven years. By answering “no” to
Section 26, the Government alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his
federal and state tax returns to at least tax year 2009. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted his non-filing of his federal and
state tax returns for the tax year of 2009. He claimed his filing lapses were isolated
incidents based on a faulty understanding of the tax laws (i.e., if he was entitled to a
refund, he had no obligation to file tax returns with either federal or state taxing
authorities) and his lack of understanding of available professional help. He claimed he
has since consulted a professional accountant and will be providing federal and state
tax return filings for the tax year of 2009.  
Addressing the alleged January 2014 omissions of his failure to file his 2009
federal and state tax returns, Applicant admitted his omissions. He denied any intent to
falsify and could not accurately explain why he omitted his failure to file tax returns for
2009.  He claimed he voluntarily disclosed his filing lapses when facing questions by an
agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in March 2014.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 34-year-old senior farm operations coordinator for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings
follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in April 2005 and has one child from this marriage. (item 2) He
earned an associate’s degree from a local community college in computer science in
3
2002 and is pursuing a bachelors’ degree in engineering in an on-line program
administered by a respected state university in his state. (Items 1-4) He claimed no
military service.
Finances
Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2009.
He could not explain with any degree of accuracy why he did not file them. He stated in
his answer that he believed he did not have to file tax returns if he was entitled to a
refund, and he lost track of time. (Items 1 and 4) He claimed he would contact a tax
professional and file his federal and state tax returns by June 14, 2014. (Item 4)
Applicant received the SOR in December 2014, and has since been furnished
his prepared federal and state tax returns for tax year 2009 by his tax preparers. (Item
5) With the help of his accountants, he assured that he filed both his federal and state
tax returns for tax year 2009. (Item 5) He documented his filing of his 2009 federal
return with an IRS transcript covering the 2009 tax period. (Item 7)  He also provided a
copy of his 2009 state tax return. (Item 11) He did not file his 2009 federal and state tax
returns, however, until December 2014, following his receipt of the SOR. (Items 5-11)
Both his federal and state returns credit Applicant with refunds: $2,209 for his federal
refund and $398 for his state refund. (Items 5-11) 
In his post-FORM submission, Applicant assured that he filed his federal tax
returns for tax years 2012-2014 in a timely way, using a certified public accountant.
(Items 5 and 7-10) He documented his tax filings for these years with unsigned tax
returns covering the respective years to back his claims that his failure to file his 2009
federal and state returns was an isolated judgment lapse.
Omissions of federal and state tax filing lapses
Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2009.
He cannot fully explain his failure to list his tax-filing omissions in the Electronic
Questionnaires for Investigation Processing (e-QIP) he completed on January 7, 2014.
(Item 2) He believed that if he was entitled to refunds in each of the taxing jurisdictions,
he need not file returns. (Items 1 and 4) He now realizes he was mistaken and has
since filed his missing federal and state returns for tax year 2009. (Items 5 and 7-11)
He received refunds as claimed which help to reinforce his assurances that his
omissions were based on mistake and not on any intent to falsify. 
Applicant’s explanations reflect some imprudence on his part. For federal filing
exemptions for tax filers are very limited and are not available to tax filers with reported
gross income over minimum threshold levels. Still, Applicant was quick to correct his
filing lapses when questioned about his taxes in an ensuing OPM interview in January
2014. In his interview with the OPM agent he was credited with a voluntary disclosure of
his failure to file his federal and state income tax returns. (Item 4) 
4
Considering all of the facts and circumstances, findings are warranted that
Applicant’s omissions of his filing lapses for tax year 2009 were imprudent and lacked
due diligence, but were not knowing and wilful omissions. These findings are reinforced
by Applicant’s answers in an interview with an OPM agent two months later (in March
2014). Without any prompting from the agent, Applicant voluntarily disclosed his 2009
filing lapses when questioned by the agent.  Applicant’s omissions reflect prompt, good
faith corrections of filing lapses in his completed e-QIP.
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by friends and a former colleague who have known
Applicant for many years. They credit him with the highest standards of personal integrity
and discretion. (Item 6) His father-in-law characterizes him as diligent and studious with
his college studies in his chosen field of electronics. (Item 6)  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.
The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
5
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully-employed senior farm operations coordinator who failed to
file his 2009 federal and state tax returns in a timely way. He has since filed his 2009
federal and state returns and provided unsigned copies of the federal returns he
timely filed covering tax years 2012-2014. 
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failing to file his federal and state
tax returns for tax year 2009. Applicant’s tax-filing lapses warrant the application of
one of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(g), “failure to file Federal,
state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” His
post-FORM submissions document his filing of his 2009 federal and state tax returns
as well as his timely filing of his federal and state returns for tax years 2012-2014.  
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s tax filing problems merit only partial application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” Judgment lapses related to an applicant’s failure to file his
tax returns in a timely way reflect a lack of due diligence in making the effort to verify
his tax-filing requirements for federal and state tax returns. To his credit, Applicant
has since documented his filing of his federal and state tax returns for tax year 2009,
which entitle him to refunds. 
Addressing and resolving the only two financial concerns raised in the SOR,
Applicant satisfied the level of financial progress required to meet the criteria
established by the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor
financial condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR
Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s sufficient tax filing
actions of his own enable him to meet the Appeal Board’s requirements for
demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008);
see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No.
99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec.
1, 1999).   
7
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s demonstrated efforts to date are
encouraging with his documented filing of his 2009 federal and state tax returns.
Backed by his filing of his 2009 federal and state tax returns and a renewed
understanding of his filing obligations, Applicant’s recent efforts are enough to
overcome security concerns associated with his history of financial instability. Whole-
person assessment is aided by the character references he has received from his
friends and a colleague who know him and have worked with him.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s isolated tax filing
lapses in 2009, his actions to date are sufficient to meet mitigation requirements
imposed by the guideline governing his finances. Favorable conclusions are
warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b of
Guideline F. 
Personal conduct concerns
Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to disclose his
failure to file his federal and state tax returns for tax year 2009. While Applicant
admitted his e-QIP omissions of his failure to file his federal and state tax returns for
tax year 2009, he denied any deliberate attempt to falsify the e-QIP he completed in
January 2014.  He assured that his omission was based on a misunderstanding over
whether he was required to file tax returns. His omissions reflect judgment lapses, but
not deliberate omissions.
In his defense, Applicant did receive refunds on his tax returns for tax year
2009, which reconciles with his claims that his omissions were the result of mistaken
understandings about his need to file tax returns for the year at issue (2009).
Moreover, when afforded an opportunity by the interviewing OPM investigator to
discuss his taxes in a March 2014 interview, Applicant fully disclosed his tax filing
omission without any prompting from the investigator. 
To the extent Applicant’s omissions reflect any reckless action on Applicant’s
part, they are mitigated by his good-faith disclosure two months after completing his
e-QIP in January 2014. MC  ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the
facts,” fully applies to Applicant’s situation
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.b:                           For Applicant
Subpara.   2.a:                For Applicant
8
Conclusions                                 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
