 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05578 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On February 4, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 20, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on September 2, 2015. Applicant was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not file objections or submit additional material. The 
Government’s exhibits (Items 4 through 8) are admitted. The case was assigned to me 
on November 9, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. I have 
incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He married in 1997, separated from his wife in 2004, 
and divorced in 2010. He has a 13-year-old child from the marriage. He served on 
active duty in the military from 1994 to 1999, and in the inactive reserve from 1999 to 
2005. He received an honorable discharge. Applicant was unemployed from April to 
September 2010. He has been employed by various federal contractors throughout his 
career. He has been employed by his present employer since September 2010.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately $37,858. The debts 
are verified and supported by credit reports from June 2014, October 2014, and August 
2015.2 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties and delinquencies to his marital 
separation in 2004 and subsequent divorce in 2010. He indicated in his answer to the 
SOR that he was maintaining two separate household when he separated. He did not 
provide any specifics regarding his expenses and whether he maintained two 
households for the entire six-year separation.3  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($4,942), 1.e ($11,939), and 1.k ($4,005) are delinquent 
student loans. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he had consolidated 
the debts and was currently repaying them. He failed to provide any documentary proof 
of his actions. During his background investigation, he indicated that he had a 
deferment on the loans, and he paid the loans for about a year after the deferment 
expired. He then arranged for reduced payments on two different occasions, but each 
time he failed to maintain the payments and the loans became delinquent.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($9,059) is for a broken lease. Applicant admitted signing 
the lease and indicated he later transferred the lease to his wife’s name, and then his 
wife broke the lease. He stated that the management company did not have the transfer 
paperwork and Applicant is liable for the amount owed. Applicant indicated in his 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 5, 6 and 7. 
 
3 Item 2 and 8. 
 
4 Item 2 and 8. 
 
3 
 
 
answer to the SOR that he would begin paying this debt. He failed to provide any 
supporting documents to show he has made any payment arrangements to satisfy the 
debt.5  
 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he was unaware of the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($161), 1.d ($145), and 1.j ($95), and he would be repaying them in the next 
month. He did not provide documentary proof of any action to pay or resolve these 
debts.6  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($1,147), 1.g ($2,464), 1.i ($508), and 1.l ($2,223) are 
credit card debts. Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he has been paying 
these debts for the past year and a half through a collection agency, and he is actively 
eliminating the debts. Applicant did not provide proof of payments or supporting 
documents.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶1.h ($1,173) is a collection account that Applicant indicated in 
his answer to the SOR was transferred to him because he co-signed on the credit card 
while he was married. He indicated he would begin paying this debt, but did not provide 
any proof of his actions or supporting documents.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 4, and 8. 
 
6 Items 2 and 8. 
 
7 Items 2 and 8. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately $37,858. Some have 
been delinquent for several years. Applicant was unable or unwilling to satisfy his debts 
in the past. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the debts alleged in the SOR. None the debts have been 
paid or resolved. He stated in his answer to the SOR that he had consolidated his 
student loans and was paying them, and he was making payments to a collection 
agency on other delinquent debts. He failed to provide any supporting evidence to 
substantiate his position.  
 
 Applicant indicated his financial problems are due to his marital separation in 
2004 and subsequent divorce in 2010. These conditions were beyond his control. For 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He has been employed with his present employer since September 
2010. He experienced six months of unemployment before then, but has been steadily 
employed otherwise. He did not provide specific information about why he was unable 
to make some payments to his creditors. Some of Applicant’s debts are less than $200 
and remain unpaid. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
6 
 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant has numerous delinquent debts 
that are unresolved, which casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that future financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there is no evidence Applicant 
has received financial counseling or that his financial problems are under control. There 
is no evidence he has made a good-faith effort to pay his overdue creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply. AG ¶ 20(e) was not raised by the evidence and does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He served in the military and was honorably 
discharged. He has had financial difficulties since he separated from his spouse in 2004 
and divorced in 2010. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to show how his finances 
were impacted and what actions he may have taken to ensure he paid his delinquent 
debts. Applicant has not provided any documentary evidence to show he is paying his 
delinquent accounts or taking meaningful action to resolve his debts. He has not 
provided evidence regarding his current finances. He has not provided information to 
show a reliable track record of financial stability. His financial problems raise questions 
about his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. The record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
