 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04506 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana on four occasions between February 2000 and June 
2013. In 2013, he used marijuana while possessing a top secret security clearance. 
More time without illegal drug use is necessary to provide assurance of Applicant’s 
judgment and his willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. He did not 
mitigate drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications (SCA) on June 3, 2008, and 
November 25, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) on 
March 16, 2015.1 Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2015, and requested a 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 6, 2015, scheduling a hearing for August 26, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). Applicant 
testified and submitted two documents post-hearing (AE 1 and 2). He also submitted a 
reference letter attached to his answer to the SOR. All exhibits and the reference letter 
were admitted without objection and made part of the record. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 3, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR – that he illegally used 
marijuana, at least four times, between February 2000 and June 2013, and that his last 
use occurred while holding a top secret security clearance. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old project manager employed by a federal contractor 
since 2007. In 1998, he was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree with a major in 
electrical engineering. In August 2008, he received a secret-level security clearance, 
which later was upgraded to a top secret clearance. Applicant married in 1998, and he 
has three sons, ages four, six, and nine. There is no evidence of any additional security 
concerns other than those alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant submitted his first SCA on June 3, 2008, and disclosed that he illegally 
used marijuana once in 2000 and once in 2007. He submitted his second SCA on 
November 12, 2013, and admitted that he used marijuana once in 2006 and once in 
June 2013. He explained that he did not intend to use marijuana in the future because 
“it’s not worth breaking the law or risking my ability to get a security clearance.” (GE 1) 
Applicant possessed a top secret security clearance when he illegally used marijuana in 
June 2013. 
 
Applicant testified that he did not use marijuana prior to 2000. In 2000, a friend of 
Applicant’s wife and her husband visited them at Applicant’s home and they brought 
marijuana to share. Applicant, his spouse, and the other couple went to Applicant’s 
basement where they smoked the marijuana. In 2006, Applicant and his spouse 
attended a beach party at one of her friend’s home. A marijuana pipe was being passed 
around among the attendants, and Applicant and his spouse used marijuana.  
 
Applicant was employed by another company from 2000 to 2007. During this 
period, he did not have a security clearance, and his employer did not have a drug-
testing program for employees. However, Applicant knew that the possession and use 
of marijuana was illegal.  
 
In 2007, while working for his current employer (a federal contractor), Applicant 
used marijuana for the third time, primarily because of peer pressure. He was 32 years 
old at the time of his marijuana use in 2007. He and his wife attended a friend’s beach 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
party where a marijuana pipe was being passed around among the attendants. 
Applicant and his spouse used marijuana. Applicant’s employer has a policy against 
illegal drug use. Applicant did not have a security clearance in 2007 when he used 
marijuana, but he was aware of his employer’s policy against the illegal use of drugs.  
 
In June 2013, Applicant and his spouse visited the same friends with whom they 
smoked marijuana in the past, and all of them smoked marijuana. In 2013, Applicant 
was 37 years old, and he possessed a top secret security clearance. At his hearing, 
Applicant testified that he “suspected” marijuana use was against the rules for security 
clearance holders. (Tr. 35) Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) and human 
resources director provided a reference letter indicating that she counseled Applicant 
concerning the responsibilities that come along with holding a security clearance. She 
believed that he understood his responsibilities.  
 
In May 2014, Applicant and his spouse ended their association with his spouse’s 
friends who were involved in the use of marijuana. Apparently, the personal relationship 
ended with the end of their business relationship. Applicant testified that in December 
2013, after a health warning from his physician, he changed his lifestyle. He is now 
eating healthier, doing exercise, and he has lost 30 pounds. In April 2015, he passed a 
drug test his employer conducted. (AE 1)  
 
Applicant’s spouse ended her marijuana use to support Applicant. She no longer 
associates with her marijuana-using friends. Her friends were the ones that provided 
Applicant and her marijuana on all four occasions that Applicant used marijuana. She 
expressed remorse and regret for her involvement with her marijuana-using friends and 
for putting her husband in those situations. Applicant’s spouse described him as “a 
wonderful man and father. [He is] extremely respected and good at his job.” She took 
responsibility for her role in providing marijuana to Applicant, and she emphasized that 
their marijuana use would not occur in the future. (AE 2)  
  
Applicant’s human relations director and facility security officer (FSO) stated that 
Applicant was “a model employee and extremely trustworthy.” Applicant is a valuable 
asset and has made important contributions to the defense contractor where he is 
employed.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes three drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse;”2 “(c) illegal drug possession;” and “(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance.” Applicant used marijuana3 on four occasions between February 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
2000 and June 2013. In June 2013, Applicant used marijuana while possessing a top 
secret security clearance. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) apply. Consideration of 
possible mitigating conditions is required.  
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
 There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004).” The passage of time after ending marijuana use is not considered in isolation. 
Marijuana use after completing an SCA “undercuts” favorable application of the drug 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
involvement recency mitigating condition. ISCR Case No. 06-18270 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 
7, 2007).  
 
Applicant used marijuana on four occasions between February 2000 and June 
2013. During his marijuana use in June 2013, Applicant held a top secret security 
clearance. Applicant participated in a drug screening test when he was hired by his 
current employer. He has known about his employer’s policy against the use of illegal 
drugs since then. Additionally, he knew or should have known of the Government’s 
security concerns about cleared personnel using illegal drugs, because he submitted a 
SCA in 2008, and answered questions about his past drug use.  
 
Applicant’s illegal marijuana use while holding a top secret clearance adversely 
reflects on his judgment and his willingness and ability to follow the law, rules, and 
regulations. Nevertheless, Applicant’s recognition of the adverse impact on his life of 
drug abuse creates some certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. AG ¶ 
26(a) partially applies to his illegal drug possession and use-related offenses.    
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. Applicant claimed that he has disassociated from his drug-
using associates, friends, and contacts, except for his wife. He has broken his patterns 
of drug abuse, and he has changed his life with respect to illegal drug use. He has 
abstained from drug abuse for about 27 months. Applicant did not provide “a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) 
partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the drug involvement security concerns.  
 
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in June 2013, about 27 months 
before his August 2015 hearing. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. 
He understands the adverse results from drug abuse.4 He has shown or demonstrated 
enough of a track record of no drug abuse to partially, but not completely, mitigate drug 
involvement as a bar to his access to classified information.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 39-year-old project manager, and he has worked for the same defense contractor 
since 2007. In August 2008, he received a security clearance. There is no evidence of 
security violations or concerns, except for his drug-related offenses. His admissions of 
marijuana possession and use on his SCAs are positive signs that Applicant is taking 
                                            
4Loss of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs, and adverse 
health and employment effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for remaining 
drug free. 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
responsibility for his drug abuse in the context of his security clearance. He stopped 
using illegal drugs in June 2013.   
 
Applicant is considered to be “a model employee and extremely trustworthy.” He 
is also a valuable asset and has made important contributions to his defense contractor 
employer. His spouse described him as “a wonderful man and father. [He is] extremely 
respected and good at his job.” Applicant and his spouse promised that their marijuana 
use would not occur in the future.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at this 
time. Applicant illegally used marijuana on four occasions between 2000 and 2013. In 
2013, he used marijuana while possessing a top secret security clearance. Each time 
he possessed illegal drugs, he committed a federal crime. He showed especially poor 
judgment in using marijuana while employed at a company prohibiting illegal drug use, 
and while holding a top secret security clearance.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated drug involvement 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant or continuation of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a security clearance in the future. With continued effort towards 
abstaining from drug involvement, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness in the future.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, based on the law, as set forth in 
Egan, I find that Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the security concerns 
pertaining to drug involvement. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for 
access to classified information at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
