 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-06631 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. DOD acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on February 28, 2015, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 19, 2015. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant and she received it on August 20, 2015. Applicant was 
 
2 
 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. She declined to submit any additional information. The Government’s 
evidence (Items 1-4) is admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on 
November 2, 2015.   
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted all SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 1.b, 
which she denied. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of 
the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a government contractor. She works as a 
customer service representative and has held that position since May 2014. She is 
divorced and has three adult children. From August 2008 through October 2009, she 
was unemployed. She has a high school diploma. She has no military background.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts for a total of approximately $15,151, and a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was discharged in 2010. The debts were listed in a credit 
report from February 2014 and discussed in her personal subject interview conducted in 
July 2014. There is no evidence supporting payment towards any of the listed debts. 
The debts are unresolved.2  
 
 In her Answer and her personal subject interview, Applicant stated that her 
financial difficulties came about because of her unemployment from 2008 to 2009, her 
divorce, and numerous medical bills she accumulated during an illness when she was 
without medical insurance. Additionally, her three adult children still live at home. Her 
plan is to start paying the medical bills one by one. She offered no proof of any 
agreements with the creditors. Her current discretionary monthly income is 
approximately $727 per month. She has not had any financial counseling.3   
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 1-4. 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
Management. DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures 
contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be 
made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
4 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
   
 All of Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts remain unpaid. Previously, she had 
her debts discharged through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2010. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. Although some of the 
debts were incurred during her unemployment and because of her medical needs, 
which are conditions beyond her control, she failed to show responsible action on her 
part to deal with the past-due debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. 
 
5 
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling, and Applicant has not offered proof 
that she paid any of the debts or established payment plans for them. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide any documentation supporting dispute of SOR ¶ 1.b. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. Applicant’s finances remain a security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of public trust by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position 
of public trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
All of Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. Her troublesome financial history 
causes me to question her ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
