KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C; Guideline F
DIGEST: It was in accordance with the Directive for the Judge grant Department Counsel’
motion to amend the SOR to conform to the evidence.  The Judge permitted Applicant more than
a month to address the new allegations.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03112.a1
DATE: 11/03/2015
DATE: November 3, 2015
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03112
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 4, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 31, 2015, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred by amending the
SOR; whether the evidence raised security concerns; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable finding under Guideline C is not at
issue in this appeal.  The Guideline F concerns were withdrawn at the start of the hearing, as was
one allegation each under Guidelines B and C.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal.  Applicant
was born in Pakistan, where he was educated at a military academy.  Following graduation, he
served as a commissioned officer in the Pakistani military, holding the equivalent of a top secret
clearance.  He retired early, immigrating to the U.S.  His mother and one of his siblings were living
in this country at that time.  Due to his military service, Applicant was entitled to land in Pakistan,
free medical care, and a pension.  He relinquished his entitlement to land, and he and his family have
never used the medical services.  His military identification card has expired.  Applicant receives
a small pension from the Pakistani government, worth about $1,200 a year.  Applicant has a sibling-
in-law who is a citizen of Pakistan.  This person’s spouse is a senior official in the Pakistani military.
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic, an ally of the U.S. in the war against terrorism.
On the other hand, Pakistan’s intelligence agency appears to support an organization that the U.S.
has designated as terrorist.  Terrorist and other extremist groups operate within that country, and
they have carried out attacks against the U.S.  The Pakistani government has committed human
rights violations, and it is plagued by corruption.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved the remaining Guideline C allegation in Applicant’s favor.  He also
entered favorable findings under all but three of the concerns alleged under Guideline B.  
The three allegations that were decided against Applicant pertained to his Pakistani military
service; his sibling-in-law and that person’s military spouse; and his wife’s inheritance.  The Judge
cited to evidence that Applicant had held a Pakistani security clearance while in the military, which,
he concluded, posed a conflict of interest with the duties expected of someone who has access to
U.S.-protected information.  He also concluded that Applicant’s ties and loyalties within the U.S.
are not sufficient to mitigate concerns that his in-laws might be a means through which he could be
3
subjected to pressure or coercion.  The Judge explicitly noted, however, that he was not finding
Applicant to be lacking in patriotism.  He also concluded that Applicant’s “sizeable financial
interest” in the future inheritance could become a lever by which foreign interests antithetical to the
U.S., that operate freely in Pakistan, could attempt to influence him.  Though citing Applicant’s
honesty and full cooperation during the clearance process, the Judge stated that even good people
can become security risks due to circumstances outside their control.
Discussion
Applicant notes that toward the end of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the
SOR to add the allegations about the in-laws and the inheritance.  Insofar as he had objected to the
amendment when it was proposed (Tr. at 79), we interpret his argument as a challenge to the Judge’s
decision to grant this motion.  We review a Judge’s decision to amend an SOR for an abuse of
discretion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00019 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2014).   
The Directive states the following:  
The SOR may be amended at the hearing by the Administrative Judge on his or her
own motion, or upon motion by Department Counsel or the applicant, so as to render
it in conformity with the evidence admitted or for other good cause.  When such
amendments are made, the Administrative Judge may grant either party’s request for
such additional time as the Administrative Judge may deem appropriate for further
preparation or other good cause.  ¶ E3.1.17.
In the case before us, evidence about Applicant’s in-laws and inheritance was educed during the
course of Applicant’s testimony, none of it having been alleged in the SOR.  Accordingly, it was
consistent with the Directive for Department Counsel to move to amend the SOR in order that it would
conform to the evidence.  Moreover, the Judge gave Applicant more than a month following the
hearing to submit additional matters to address these new allegations.  Tr. at 81.  The Judge’s decision
to grant Department Counsel’s motion was consistent with the provisions of the Directive.  This
decision was not an abuse of discretion. 
Applicant argues that his in-laws are not people of bad character or the kind who would act
against the interests of the U.S.  He also argues that his military service to Pakistan was honorable and
in no way an indication that he would harm the U.S.  We construe this argument as a challenge to the
Judge’s conclusion that evidence of these matters raised concerns under Guideline B.  The Directive
presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct or circumstances under any of the Guidelines
and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See. e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04648 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep.
9, 2015). 
In this case, Applicant’s admissions to the SOR, along with the evidence contained in the
security clearance application and elicited during testimony, are sufficient to establish the factual basis
1Applicant also notes that the security clearance application did not inquire about siblings-in-law.  He argues
that such persons are not of security significance.  However,  “In-laws represent a class of persons who are contemplated
by the Directive as presenting a potential security risk.  As a matter of common sense and human experience, there is
a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the
person’s spouse.”  ISCR Case No. 12-00084 at 3 (App. Bd. May 22, 2014).  Applicant’s evidence and testimony are not
sufficient to rebut this presumption.
2See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(e): “a substantial . . . financial, or property interest in a foreign country . . .
which could subject the individual to heightened risk fo foreign influence or exploitation[,]”  
4
of the Guideline B concerns at issue here.  Applicant states that his service was honorable and that his
in-laws themselves are not engaged in activity antithetical to U.S. interests.1  However, Department
Counsel is not required to prove an actual threat of espionage.  To the contrary, factors such as an
applicant’s relatives’ obscurity or the failure of foreign authorities to contact those relatives in the past
do not provide a meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s circumstances pose a security risk.
ISCR Case No. 07-18283 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2009).  It is the nature of the foreign ties themselves
that give rise to a security concern.  An applicant’s ties, either directly or through a family member,
to persons of high rank in a foreign military (such as his in-law), are of concern because it is
foreseeable that through such an association the applicant could come to the attention of those
interested in acquiring U.S.-protected information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-12623 at 5 (App. Bd.
Feb. 2, 2015), in which the applicant’s security-significant circumstances included a sister-in-law
married to a retired high-ranking official in the Russian army.  In addition, the Judge’s conclusion that
Applicant’s having served in a foreign military and having held a foreign security clearance pose a
danger of a conflict of interest is supportable under the facts of this case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
10-00824 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 6, 2012) (Prior involvement with a foreign defense establishment or
prior access to sensitive foreign military projects raises “significant questions that require scrutiny in
evaluating an applicant’s security eligibility.”) (internal citation omitted) After considering the record
evidence as a whole, we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s foreign
connections and possible foreign financial interest raise security concerns under Guideline B.2
Applicant cites to his substantial favorable evidence concerning his ties within the U.S.  He
also emphasizes that he is loyal to this country.  The Judge’s extensive findings of fact address the
evidence that Applicant has cited.  Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the presumption that
the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-08412 at 2 (App.
Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).  Applicant’s argument consists, in effect, of an alternative interpretation of the
record, which is not enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05251 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 5,
2015).  We note Applicant’s statement to the effect that he has lost job opportunities due to the Judge’s
decision.  However, the Directive does not permit us to consider the impact of an adverse
determination.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02041 at 3  (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015).  
Regarding Applicant’s argument about his ties to and within the U.S., neither the Judge nor
the Appeal Board are concluding or assuming that Applicant is lacking in character or loyalty to this
country.  The Directive is clear that an adverse determination is a determination in terms of national
security and is in no sense a conclusion about the applicant’s loyalty.  Directive, Enclosure 1,
5
SECTION 7.  See ISCR Case No. 12-08412 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).   Moreover, a  “clearance
does not equate with passing judgment upon an individual’s character.  Instead, it is only an attempt
to predict his possible future behavior and to assess whether, under the compulsion of circumstances
or for other reasons, he might compromise sensitive information.”  Hill v. Dept. of the Air Force, 844
F. 2d 1407 at 1409 (10th Cir. 1988).  Even a person of the highest character can experience
circumstances under which he could be tempted to place the well-being of foreign relatives over the
interests of the U.S., and this is the context in which the Judge made his adverse decision.  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  In addition to the matters discussed above about Applicant’s military service, foreign in-
laws, and foreign financial interests, the nature of the foreign government  and the presence of terrorist
activity are important considerations, as is Pakistan’s human rights record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
