KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel a Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05023.a1
DATE: 11/25/2015
DATE: November 25, 2015
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05023
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On
December 8, 2014 DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On August 31, 2015, after the close of the record, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is 43 years old.  He admitted
sixteen out of nineteen debts alleged in the SOR, totaling approximately $41,000.  He became
excessively indebted due to a marital separation in 2009 that led to a divorce two years later.  In the
divorce decree, Applicant was awarded many of the financial accounts.  He states he contacted many
of his creditors about his situation, but many of them would not work with him.  He is now indebted
to twelve creditors for approximately $19,000 in delinquent debt.  Applicant blames the dissolution
of his marriage and the resulting accumulation of many of the marital debts for his financial
problems.  
Applicant has provided some documentary evidence to show that two judgments and five
other delinquent debts have been paid off or are being resolved.  In regard to twelve other debts, he
has failed to submit any documentary evidence to show that he is addressing them.
The Judge reached the following conclusions:  Although his martial separation and divorce
began Applicant’s financial problems, it is not clear from the record that, since his divorce, he has
acted responsibly and reasonably under the circumstances.  Given the extensive nature of his
indebtedness, it will take some time before Applicant is even close to being debt free.  With regard
to twelve of his nineteen debts, there is no evidence of any efforts to repay these debts, be it prior
to or after the receipt of the SOR.  Without more, the Applicant has failed to establish that he is
fiscally responsible.  Applicant has not met his burden of proving that he is worthy of a security
clearance.   
Applicant argues that the Judge did not take into account the large amount of debt that he
has paid or resolved since his divorce.  He asserts that, although he is not debt free, he has strived
to correct all debts that became his responsibility as a result of his divorce.  He emphasizes his
military service record and his employment history and asserts that, under the whole-person concept,
he should be considered a person of integrity.  Applicant’s arguments do not establish error on the
part of the Judge.
Applicant’s appeal submission contains assertions and documents that were not part of the
record below.  The Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
3
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel
the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to
weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable
evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).
Applicant’s debt payment efforts and his favorable military and civilian employment record was
evidence that the Judge was required to consider.  However, such evidence does not mandate a
favorable decision.  Applicant’s arguments are not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had a lengthy and serious
history of not meeting financial obligations, and that he had not sufficiently demonstrated that he
had acted responsibly with regard to his debts, despite the mitigating factor of his divorce.  Central
to the Judge’s analysis was her finding that, as to twelve of Applicant’s nineteen debts, there was
no evidence in the record that he had even begun to address them.  This finding, and the resulting
conclusion that Applicant had not demonstrated reasonable behavior with regard to his debts, are
supported by the record.  The Judge adequately discussed why, given the state of the record, the
disqualifying conduct established under Guideline F was not mitigated.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
her decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan     
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
4
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
