                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-04110
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 2, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on February 20, 2013.  On November 5, 2014, the Department of Defense
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006.
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on March 2, 2015, and
requested an Administrative Determination by an administrative judge.  Department
Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 31, 2015.  Applicant has
not responded to the FORM.  The case was assigned to me on August 5, 2015.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Paragraphs 1.a., 1.b., and 1.i~1.o. of the SOR, with explanations.  He denied the factual
allegations in Paragraphs 1.c.~1.h. of the SOR.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant is a 45 year old “Federal Contractor,” and has been such since
February of 2010.  (Item 4 at pages 5 and 10.)  He fails to note the cause of his current
financial difficulties, but notes that he was unemployed from June of 2007 until
beginning his current employment in 2010.  (Item 4 at pages 10~11.)
1.a.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor A for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $14,439.  As he offers nothing further in this regard, I find that it is still
past due and find against Applicant as to this allegation.
1.b.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor B for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $7,381.  He is addressing this debt by way of a garnishment, as
evidenced by a payroll document.  (Item 3 at page 6.)  This allegation is found for
Applicant.
1.c. and 1.e.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor C for past-due
debts totaling about $7,781.  These debts were settled and paid, as evidenced by his
submitted March 2015 credit report.  (Item 3 at pages 9~11.)  These allegations are
found for Applicant.
1.d. and 1.f.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor D for past-due debts
totaling about $5,258.  In his Answer Applicant avers that he is “not familiar with this
company,” but offers nothing further in this regard.  (Item 3 at page 3.)  As these past-
due debts appear on the Government’s most recent July 2014 credit report (Item 5 at
page 2), these allegations are found against Applicant.
1.g.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor G as the result of a
judgment for about $1,410.  This judgment has been “satisfied” as evidenced by a
“Judgment Release” (Item 3 at page 5); and as such, this allegation is found for
Applicant.
1.h.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor H  for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $1,136.  This debt has been paid, as evidenced by a letter from a
successor creditor to this debt (Item 3 at page 7); and as such, this allegation is found
for Applicant.
1.i.~1.o  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditors I~O for an outstanding
judgment and for past-due debts totaling about $11,949.  As he offers nothing further in
this regard, I find that the judgment is still outstanding, and the debts are still past due;
and as such, I find against Applicant as to these allegations.
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  (AG Paragraph 2.)  The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
4
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant past-due debts,
totaling about $31,646, that remain past due.  I can find no countervailing Mitigating
Condition that is applicable here.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me with
questions and doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
Applicant has failed to fully respond to the Government’s concerns; and as such, has
failed to address all the alleged past-due debts and an outstanding judgment.  For this
5
reason, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept arising from his Financial Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
