 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06883 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On May 27, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 26, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on September 1, 2015. Applicant was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not file objections or submit additional material. The 
Government’s exhibits (Items 3 through 6) are admitted. The case was assigned to me 
on November 9, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.g and 1.h with 
explanations. He denied the remaining allegations. I have incorporated his admissions 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He married in 1982 and divorced in 2009. He has a 17-
year-old child from the marriage. He remarried in 2009. He served in the Air Force from 
1990 and retired honorably in 2010. Applicant had periods of unemployment from 
January 2013 to February 2013 and November 2011 to March 2012. He has been 
employed full-time with his present employer since March 2014 and also has been 
employed part-time since March 2013.1  
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $68,963. The 
debts are verified and supported by credit reports from August 2014 and July 2015.2 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($11,421) is a judgment issued in September 2013. In September 2014, 
Applicant indicated during his background interview with a government investigator that 
he could not recall this debt. He did not provide any information about what actions he 
has taken to research and resolve this judgment.3 
 
 Applicant admitted the collection account debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($10,236) and 1.d. 
($1,099). He did not provide any information about what actions he has taken to resolve 
them. He admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($12,339) for a repossessed time-share 
vacation property that he and his ex-wife purchased. During his background interview, 
he acknowledged defaulting on the loan and believed his ex-wife was responsible for 
this debt. He did not provide any evidence verifying he is no longer responsible for the 
debt. Applicant denied the collection account debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($915). He did not 
provide any information regarding what actions he has taken to dispute or resolve the 
account. 
 
 Applicant denied the collection account in SOR ¶ 1.e ($291) for medical services. 
He indicated in his answer to the SOR that he contacted his medical insurer and was 
told it was not covered. He believed this debt should have been included in a hospital 
bill. He has not provided any documentary information about actions he may have taken 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 5 and 6. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
to dispute or resolve this debt. He denies the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($77) indicating during 
his background interview that he did not recall the account. In his answer to the SOR, 
he indicated he was not aware of the account. Applicant failed to provide information of 
what actions he may have taken to dispute, research, or resolve the debt.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($32,585) is for child support arrearages. Applicant 
indicated that when he divorced he was on active duty in the military. He was ordered 
by a court to pay $1,100 monthly for child support. When he retired from the military his 
income was reduced, and he was unable to make the ordered payments. He has 
attempted to get the order modified and was advised to contact the appropriate agency 
where the child resides. In July 2014, he contacted an attorney who provided him 
guidance on how to apply for modification and reduction of child support. During 
Applicant’s background interview in September 2014, he indicated he was completing 
the paperwork to request a modification and reduction of the child support order. He 
indicated that his pay from his part-time job was being garnished to pay his child 
support.5 In his answer to the SOR, he indicated he was still attempting to get the order 
modified and payment reduced. He stated that his part-time job wages were still being 
garnished. He did not provide any supporting documents to show his attempts to have 
the order modified or proof that he is making payments through garnishment. The debt 
is not resolved.6 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial issues to a reduction in income after he retired 
from the military in 2010. He did not provide any financial information to substantiate his 
past income, current income, retirement pay, or expenses. He did not provide 
information about whether his wife contributes to the household expenses. Applicant’s 
credit report reflects he purchased a new vehicle in 2013 for approximately $24,000. No 
current financial information was provided.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
4 Items 5 and 6. Applicant’s credit reports indicate two new accounts from the same creditor in the 
amounts of $2,204 and $1,867 that are charged off. I have not considered these delinquent accounts for 
disqualifying purposes, but will consider them when analyzing the whole-person.  
 
5 Item 4.  
 
6 Items 2 and 4.  
 
7 Items 5 and 6. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $68,963. Some have 
been delinquent for several years. Applicant was unable or unwilling to satisfy his debts 
in the past. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None the debts alleged in the SOR have been paid, resolved, researched, or 
disputed. Applicant admitted the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d and 1.h. He did 
not provide evidence of actions he may have taken with the creditors to arrange 
payments plans or resolve the debts. He did not provide information as to what action 
he may have taken to pay the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a. During his background interview 
 
6 
 
 
he was made aware of the debts alleged in the SOR. Some he indicated he could not 
recall. Others he disputed and was going to research. Applicant did not provide any 
substantive evidence of his actions or attempts to resolve the delinquent debts. 
Applicant indicated his financial problems are the result of an income reduction after he 
retired from the military. This was somewhat beyond his control, but not an unexpected 
event. He also went through a divorce, which was beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He indicated that he is attempting to have his court ordered child 
support payments modified and reduced, but did not provide any substantive evidence 
of his actions. He has not provided any information as to what actions he has taken to 
resolve any of the other delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because he has numerous delinquent debts that are 
unresolved, which cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. There is insufficient evidence that future financial problems are unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there is no evidence Applicant has received 
financial counseling or that his financial problems are under control. There is no 
evidence he has made a good-faith effort to pay his overdue creditors. His child support 
payments are being garnished. Applicant disputes certain debts, but failed to provide 
the basis of his dispute and information about what actions he has taken to research the 
debt, contact the creditor, or other evidence of actions to resolve the debt. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He retired from the military. He has had financial 
difficulties since his retirement due to a reduction in income. Applicant has not provided 
any documentary evidence to show he is paying his delinquent accounts or taking 
meaningful action to resolve his debts. He has not provided evidence regarding his 
current finances. He has not provided information to show a reliable track record of 
financial stability. His financial problems raise questions about his trustworthiness, 
reliability, and good judgment. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
