 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05556 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) on March 23, 2015, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by DOD in September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On June 4, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 27, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 7. On August 28, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply 
additional information. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on November 10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had eight delinquent debts totaling about 
$54,000. The largest debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) was a $29,760 charged-off home equity loan. In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each allegation. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for that contractor since July 2004. He graduated from high school in 1983. He 
served on active duty in the Navy from 1984 to 2004 and retired honorably in the grade 
of petty officer first class (E-6). He married in 1993 and divorced in 2008. He has a six-
year-old son. He was granted a security clearance in 1986.2 
 
 In 2007, Applicant and his wife separated. He took out a home equity loan to buy 
out her interest in the property. After they separated, he encountered financial problems 
going from two incomes to one. At some point, his girlfriend became pregnant, and she 
was unemployed. He provided his girlfriend financial support and later made child 
support payments. He fell behind on his bills. His home was foreclosed. In his SCA, 
Applicant indicated that he was preparing to file bankruptcy. During an Office of 
Personnel Management interview in May 2014, Applicant reportedly indicated that he 
intended to contact his creditors and figure out if he could afford to pay them without 
declaring bankruptcy. He also indicated that he was paying his current bills and 
intended to clear up the delinquent debts.3  
  
 Applicant provided no proof of payments toward the delinquent debts. No proof 
was provided that he filed bankruptcy or has taken any other steps to resolve the 
delinquent debts.4 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
                                                          
1 Items 1 and 2. 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 4.  
 
4 Item 1-4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
 
4 
 
 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are ongoing and significant. He went through a divorce that contributed to his 
 
5 
 
 
financial problems. However, he failed to show that he has acted responsibly in 
addressing his delinquent debts since his divorce. Insufficient evidence was presented 
to conclude his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and are 
unlikely to recur. From the evidence presented, his financial problems continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.5 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information does not outweigh the 
security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion, and the 
alleged security concerns have not been mitigated. Following the Egan decision and the 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required under the Directive are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
