KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: Given the record evidence, it was reasonable for the Judge to conclude that Applicant
committed the assualts and that charges were dropped for reasons that were not inconsistent with
Applicant’s guilt.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-01763.a1
DATE: 11/03/2015
DATE: November 3, 2015
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01763
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
1“There have been times when I have hit my wife and I believe being abused myself makes it easier for me to
strike another.”  Decision at 3, quoting from Government Exhibit 11, Affidavit, dated December 5, 1992.  
2Applicant claimed that he acted in self-defense.  FAP officials substantiated mutual assaults by both Applicant
and his spouse.  Decision at 3.   
3A Judge is precluded from raising security concerns outside the scope of the SOR without amending the SOR
and giving the parties a reasonable time in which to prepare to address the amendment.  However, conduct not alleged
may be relevant for other purposes, for example in evaluating an applicant’s evidence for extenuation or mitigation and
for assessing his credibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, Note 1 (App. Bd. Sep. 12, 2014).  The Judge
evaluated Applicant’s non-alleged misconduct in its proper context.  
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
18, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Department Counsel requested a hearing.  On August 31, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge made a finding that was
not supported by the record evidence; whether the Judge considered all of the evidence; and whether
the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant served in the U.S. military from 1983 until his retirement in 2005.  He holds a
master’s degree.  Applicant has been married three times, the first two marriages ending in divorces.
Applicant has two children, ages 17 and 29.  He has held a security clearance since 1987.  Applicant
is currently employed by a Defense contractor.
Applicant’s SOR alleges seven incidents in which he was charged with assault-related
offenses, one of them a felony.  Six of the charges were dismissed, and the disposition of the
remaining one was not alleged.  In addition, the record contains evidence of other non-alleged
misconduct of a similar nature, including a commander’s report of adverse action substantiating that
Applicant had struck his then-wife several times on the chest, neck, and head with his fist; an
affidavit completed in 1992 in which Applicant admitted to having hit a former wife;1 a 2003
incident in which military Family Advocacy Program (FAP) officials substantiated an assault by
Applicant on his second wife;2 a 2013 sheriff’s report describing Applicant’s having committed a
battery by strangulation; and two incidents from 2014, evidenced by sheriff’s reports, in which
Applicant was described as having shoved his wife and, in the latter incident, placed his hands
around her throat.  The Judge stated that he was considering the non-alleged assaults in evaluating
Applicant’s credibility, his case for mitigation, the whole-person analysis, etc.3  Applicant either
3
denied that he committed the misconduct described above or claimed that he was acting in self-
defense.  
Applicant has attended an anger management class as a result of one of the charges.  He has
also consulted with a psychiatrist during the course of his current marriage.  Applicant stated that
his current wife is an alcoholic and that when she drinks he leaves the residence.  Applicant enjoys
a good reputation for trustworthiness, integrity, and devotion to protecting U.S. interests.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cleared Applicant of one Guideline E allegation concerning an omission from his
security clearance application.  He arrived at a different conclusion for the allegations under
Guideline J as well and one under Guideline E that cross-alleged the same misconduct.  The Judge
noted that Applicant had never been convicted of any of the assault charges evidenced in the record.
However, he found that the Government had presented sufficient evidence to establish that the
misconduct underlying the charges took place.  The Judge stated that some of the incidents were
corroborated by witnesses or by evidence of the complainant’s injuries.  He also noted that the
record contains evidence of multiple victims.  He stated that, in domestic abuse cases, it is not
surprising that a victim might be unwilling to pursue charges against her primary income earner.
The Judge found that Applicant’s denials of culpability were not credible and that the evidence
raised security concerns.  
In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge acknowledged that some of the
victims may not have been blameless themselves insofar as they may have participated in the violent
conduct.  However, the Judge concluded that, despite provocation, Applicant was a willing
participant.  He noted that the incidents contained in the record involved five different victims and
occurred over a lengthy period of time, from 1987 to 2014.  The Judge cited to evidence that
Applicant has sought marital counseling.  However, he concluded that there was insufficient reason
to believe that the misconduct will not recur, insofar as the stressors that gave rise to the assaults are
still present in Applicant’s life.  The Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s military service and
good employment record but stated that Applicant had presented insufficient evidence of reform and
rehabilitation.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the statement in the Analysis portion of the Decision that it is not
surprising that an assault victim might decline to pursue charges against the household’s income
earner.  He contends that this was not supported by any evidence in the record.  We examine a
Judge’s findings of fact to see if they are supported by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same
record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
We have considered this assignment of error in light of the record as a whole.  Applicant is
correct that there is no evidence that explicitly addresses this matter.  However, the record contains
4See, e.g., Government Exhibit 3, Employer’s Adverse Information Report, that contains a bill of No
Information by the State Attorney for the 2013 incident.  It states in pertinent part, “The Victim does not wish to proceed
or cooperate with the State, and based thereon, the State will not be able to meet its burden of proof beyond a reasonable
doubt.”  
5Indeed, it can be error for a Judge to conclude, as Applicant proposes, that the dismissal of multiple charges
means that the defendant was innocent.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02567 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2015): “[C]harges
can be dismissed for any number of reasons that are consistent with guilt.  The mere fact that a court dismisses charges
does not in and of itself justify a conclusion that an applicant did not commit the conduct in question.”  (footnote omitted)
4
substantial evidence of (1) numerous assault charges against Applicant extending over a lengthy
period of time; (2) multiple victims of the assaults; (3) the contents of military records and
police/sheriff’s reports that establish assaults by Applicant against domestic partners; and (4)
Applicant’s 1992 admission that he had hit a former wife.  We also note evidence in which
authorities cited to a lack of cooperation by victims as a reason for declining to prosecute, without
stating or suggesting that the charges were unfounded.4  
Under these facts, it was reasonable for the Judge to conclude that Applicant committed the
assaults at issue here and that the charges against him were dropped for reasons not inconsistent with
his guilt.  See ISCR Case No. 10-05039 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2011) for the proposition that
dismissal of charges does not preclude a Judge from finding that the underlying conduct occurred.5
Insofar as the victims were spouses or persons residing with Applicant, the Judge inferred that they
may well have been concerned about a loss of income should Applicant have been convicted.  This
inference was reasonable.  Even if the Judge had not drawn this inference, however, there is no
reason to believe that he would have arrived at a different overall decision.  Therefore, even if the
Judge’s comment constituted an error, it was harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-23829 at 3
(App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2007), for a definition of harmless error.  Applicant has not identified any
harmful error in the Judge’s findings of fact.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the
Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420
at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  
Applicant cites to evidence favorable to him, such as his character references, his having
never been convicted of any charges, and his clean security record.  Applicant has not rebutted the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
12-08412 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).  Neither has he demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed
the evidence.  
In support of his appeal, Applicant cites to a Hearing Office case that he believes supports
his effort to retain his clearance.  We have given this case due consideration as persuasive authority.
However, Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal
Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02632 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).  The case that Applicant
has cited is different from his own in many ways, including that it arose from a single incident rather
than numerous ones.  This case does not provide a reason to conclude that the Judge erred in his
analysis of Applicant’s security-significant conduct.  
5
Applicant argues that Applicant’s denials of wrongdoing were worthy of belief, citing to
evidence that the charges were dismissed.  He also states that not all of the charges were dropped
because the victims refused to cooperate.  We give deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations.
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  It is true that the record does not describe specific reasons for many of the
charges having been dropped.  However, considering the evidence as a whole, that does not provide
a reason to conclude that Applicant’s claims of factual innocence were worthy of belief.  Applicant’s
appeal brief does not point to evidence that undermines the Judge’s credibility determination.  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors..  The multiple nature of
the assaults, the multiple victims, the length of time over which the misconduct took place, the
relative recency of Applicant’s last recorded incident of domestic battery, and the Judge’s adverse
credibility determination support his overall conclusions.  The decision is sustainable on this record.
“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See
also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
