 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03212 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on June 4, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely 
submitted AE C through E, which were also admitted without objection.  I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 11, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 51, has worked for a federal contractor as a welder since February 
2013. He also works as a part-time sheriff’s deputy. On his security clearance 
application, also submitted in February 2013, Applicant disclosed unpaid state taxes. 
The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant owed approximately $16,000 on 11 
delinquent accounts.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his frequent job changes between 
2005 and 2013 to pursue better employment opportunities. Some of the jobs kept him 
away from home, requiring his wife to stop working so that she could be at home for the 
couple’s two children. During this time, Applicant incurred his three largest debts. He fell 
behind on his child support obligation for his daughter, now 20, from a previous 
relationship. (SOR 1.e, $4,000)  According to the state’s child support enforcement 
agency, Applicant is making regular and timely payments on the arrearage.4 An error 
made on Applicant’s state income tax returns over a number of years resulted in the 
state filing four state tax liens against Applicant between 2005 and 2012, totaling 
$4,700. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d) Applicant paid the outstanding state liability in February 2014, 
and the state has released the liens. Applicant and his wife now use a tax preparer to 
avoid problems in the future.5  
 
The third large debt is the charged-off automobile loan. (SOR ¶ 1.f, $6,300). 
Applicant purchased the vehicle with his brother-in-law in 2005 and made the payments 
on the loan. The brother-in-law assumed possession of the vehicle in 2009. Applicant 
thought his brother-in-law was making the loan payments. Applicant and his brother-in-
law settled the outstanding account in June 2015. Applicant has disputed the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ i.j ($225) with a credit reporting agency, and the account has been 
deleted. Applicant denies owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.i and 1.k, 
totaling $775. These accounts remain unresolved. Applicant’s most recent credit report, 
                                                          
2 The discovery letter is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit  (HE) I. 
 
3 Tr. 19-21; GE 1, 3-4. 
 
4 The agency did not provide a remaining balance on the arrearage.  
 
5 Tr. 21, 37-41; AE A, D.  
 
 
3 
 
dated June 2015, shows three new delinquent accounts, totaling $600. Applicant is not 
familiar with the accounts.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
6 Tr. 41-48; GE 3-4; AE B, E. 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”7 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes 11 delinquent accounts, totaling $16,000. 
The debts are substantiated by the record, supporting findings that Applicant has a 
history of not paying his debts and that he had an inability to do so.8 However, he has 
submitted sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns raised by his finances. 
Applicant has demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts, 
beginning well before the SOR was issued.9 Applicant resolved the alleged tax liens 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d) in February 2014. He is in good standing with his state’s child 
support enforcement agency. (SOR ¶ 1.e) He has also settled the charged-off 
automobile loan. (SOR 1.f) Although Applicant has several unresolved delinquent 
accounts, the total amount outstanding, approximately $1,300, is minimal and does not 
represent a security risk. 
 
I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. 
In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 
2(a). Applicant’s period of financial problems is not indicative of financial irresponsibility, 
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to follow rules and regulations. 
Having addressed 93% of the accounts alleged in the SOR, Applicant has 
demonstrated a favorable record of debt repayment. In light of his efforts, Applicant’s 
finances are no longer a security concern. 
                                                          
7  AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
9 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
