Item 3.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01198
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred more than $278,000 in delinquent debts over the past decade.
He recently entered into a debt resolution plan addressing fewer than half of them,
despite employment in his current position since December 2008. Resulting security
concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on October 22,
2013.  On June 4, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility1
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  The action was taken under2
Item 2.3
Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations.4
Item 3; AE A.5
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k, as well as those alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m, respectively are6
based on credit report entries by the original creditors and the collection agencies that later acquired those
debts. Only the allegations concerning debts owed to the collection agencies in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.m will be
used for analysis of Applicant’s delinquencies, which accordingly number 11 and total $278,129. 
Item 2.7
2
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR on July 23, 2014, and
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on3
March 25, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was4
received by Applicant on May 10, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity to file
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted additional material in response to the
FORM on June 4, 2015, to which Department Counsel had no objection. This response
to the FORM is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. I received the case assignment
on July 14, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 52 years old, and seeks renewal of his security clearance in
connection with his work as a marine engineer for a defense contractor. He is recently
married to a woman with whom he cohabited for about 20 years, and has an adult
daughter who was raised by and resides with her mother in a Southeast Asian country.
He has no military service. He has held a security clearance since about 2001.  5
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of the 13 allegations
concerning delinquent debts.  He entered five of these debts into a debt resolution6
program under which he made monthly payments of $1,195 starting in May 2013, and
said that the remaining debts had been “closed,” apparently due to their age.7
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.
Applicant worked as a civilian employee of the Military Sealift Command from
June 1988 until July 2004, when he was unable to renew his U.S. Coast Guard
Merchant Marine license due to outstanding issues from his conviction for Driving Under
Item 3.8
SOR ¶ 1.h.9
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, and 1.j.10
Items 2-6; AE A.11
SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.m. 12
Item 2.13
3
the Influence (DUI) during August 1993. He also reported on his SF-86 that “other
issues” prevented renewal of his Coast Guard license, potentially including his admitted
convictions for another DUI and cocaine possession in March 1989. As a result of his
inability to renew the license, Applicant was unemployed from July 2004 until December
2008, when his current employer hired him.   Applicant traces his financial problems to8
this extended period of unemployment.
Applicant’s credit reports document six delinquent debts, totaling $192,075 that
are not enrolled in his debt resolution plan. The majority of this total reflects the
charged-off $161,000 balance due on a mortgage loan that was foreclosed after he
stopped making payments in August 2007.  He opened that loan in an April 20069
refinancing secured by the home he purchased in 1999. He offered no information from
which to determine his present obligations with respect to this mortgage debt. He also
offered no evidence concerning resolution of the other five “closed” debts that are not
enrolled in the plan,  which comprise $31,075 of consumer and credit card accounts.10 11
Applicant explained that when he resumed working in December 2008 he used
his earnings to pay off delinquent tax debts, to send funds to his daughter for her living
and college expenses, and to pay his current living expenses. In May 2013, after his
company’s Government contract was renewed with attendant prospects for his
continued employment, he entered into a debt resolution plan with a company to
address the other five of his SOR-listed delinquent debts, which totaled $86,054.  He12
said that the debt resolution company informed him that his other delinquent debts did
not need to be included in the plan, but offered no evidence to corroborate this claim.
As of the close of the record, Applicant had made regular payments into the debt
resolution plan for 25 months, totaling $29,875. The most recent plan account statement
that he submitted showed the status of two of these debts to be, “Resolved”; two others
to be, “Active Negotiation”; and the final one to be, “Ongoing Structure.” No definition of
these status categories was provided, but the statement showed large “Current
Balance” figures for all five accounts, totaling $86,811. The only account statements
Applicant submitted from the original creditors involved were more than five years old,13
and the debt plan statement did not reflect any disbursements toward the debts. That
statement included a pie chart showing that 74% of his debt was “Settled,” despite
AE A.14
AE A.15
4
being only 25 months into a 48-month program, and showed his progress tracking
below his “Program Savings Goal.”  14
Applicant provided no evidence establishing his current income. He submitted a
hand-written document entitled, “MONTHLY BILLS,” that showed expenses of $1,852
and debt program payments of $1,195, for a total of $3,047 per month. This “budget”
had no entries for food, medical or renter’s insurance, clothing, entertainment, or other
miscellaneous cost of living expenses. Applicant offered no evidence of financial
counseling, savings or retirement investments, or other indicators of financial
responsibility.  15
The record lacks corroborating evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures.
No character witnesses provided statements describing his judgment, trustworthiness,
integrity, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in
person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
5
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Applicant admittedly has more than $192,000 in unresolved delinquent debts that
are not enrolled in his debt resolution plan, and has paid $29,875 toward resolution of
the five program debts, which total more than $86,000. His ongoing pattern and history
of inability or unwillingness to pay lawful debts raise security concerns under DCs 19(a)
and (c), and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those
concerns. 
6
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant has incurred substantial delinquent debts, which continue to date. He
offered evidence of recent participation in a debt resolution plan addressing some of
them, but continues to carry a large amount of unresolved debt. He failed to
demonstrate that conditions beyond his control contributed to his financial problems,
since his criminal conduct was the cause of his unemployment, or that he acted
responsibly under such circumstances by seeking other employment not requiring a
Coast Guard license. MC 20(e) requires documented proof to substantiate the basis of
a dispute concerning a delinquent debt, and Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged
in the SOR. Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish mitigation under any of
the foregoing conditions.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
7
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
and experienced adult, who is responsible for the voluntary choices and conduct that
caused the financial problems underlying the security concerns expressed in the SOR.
His SOR-listed delinquent debts arose over the past decade, and remain largely
unresolved despite employment in his current position since December 2008. He
offered insufficient evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, better judgment, or
responsible conduct in other areas of his life to offset resulting security concerns. The
potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from his financial situation remains
undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k and 1.l: For Applicant (as duplicates)
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
