1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-02278 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption), J (Criminal Conduct), F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal 
Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 5, 2014. 
On September 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines G, J, F, and E. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 29, 
2015, and the case was assigned to me on August 31, 2015. On September 9, 2015, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
2 
 
was scheduled for September 25, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified but did not present any documents or the testimony of any other 
witnesses. I kept the record open until October 9, 2015, to enable him to present 
documentary evidence, but he did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on October 6, 2015. 
 
Correction of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 2.a, alleging that Applicant was 
charged with “Misdemeanor Destruction of Private Property, a Felony,” by deleting the 
words, “a Felony.” I granted the motion. (Tr. 16-17.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a, 3.a, and 3.b. 
He denied SOR ¶¶ 3.c-3.f. He did not admit or deny SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 4.d, but those 
paragraphs cross-allege allegations that he admitted under other guidelines. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old electrician employed by a defense contractor since 
May 2011. He was previously employed by the same defense contractor as a sheet 
metal worker from January 1991 to July 1993. He does not have a current active 
clearance. (Tr. 7-8.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1989. He served in the Air National 
Guard from November 1989 to November 1993, when he was honorably discharged. 
He attended a technical school from April 1996 to April 2000 and was certified as an 
electrical journeyman. He worked as an electrician in the private sector from January 
2000 to October 2010. He was unemployed from October 2010 to May 2011, when he 
began his current job. 
 
 Applicant married in October 1993 and divorced in October 1999. He remarried 
in June 2001 and divorced in October 2012. He has two sons, ages 13 and 10. He pays 
child support of $1,078 per month. (Tr. 27.) 
 
 In June 2002, Applicant was interviewed regarding an earlier SCA in which he 
disclosed arrests in January 1991 for destruction of private property and in March 1991 
for driving while intoxicated (DWI). The January 1991 arrest occurred after he punched 
a hole in the wall of a restroom in a convenience store. He was convicted of a 
misdemeanor and sentenced to 30 days of community service and probation for one 
year.  
 
The March 1991 DWI occurred after he consumed about 12 beers at a friend’s 
house and was stopped by police for driving on the wrong side of the road. He was 
convicted, fined $150, and ordered to attend an alcohol safety awareness program 
3 
 
(ASAP). His driver’s license was suspended for six months. (GX 3 at 4.) His security 
clearance investigation was completed in July 2002, but no clearance was granted. (GX 
1 at 31.) 
 
 Applicant submitted another SCA in August 2013, and he answered “No” to the 
question, “Have you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs? 
(Emphasis in original.) (GX 5 at 30.) He did not disclose his March 1991 DWI arrest. He 
submitted another SCA on February 5, 2014, in which he answered “No” to the same 
question. (GX 1 at 29.) 
 
 Applicant’s third SCA was submitted on February 5, 2014, three days after he 
was arrested for DUI. He had been drinking with co-workers and pulled off the road 
when he realized he had consumed too much alcohol. A state trooper pulled up behind 
him and took him to the police station, where a breathalyzer indicated a blood-alcohol 
content of .15%. He was convicted of DUI and sentenced to five days in jail, which he 
served on weekends. His driver’s license was suspended for one year and he was 
required to complete a ten-week ASAP program and have an interlock device installed 
on his vehicle. (Tr. 29-31.) 
 
Applicant’s February 2014 DUI arrest was on a Sunday, and he spent the night in 
jail. On Monday, he reported his arrest to his supervisor and his security office. (Tr. 50-
52.) He testified that, based on a conversation with a person in the security office, he 
did not believe he was required to disclose his DUI arrest in his SCA because he had 
not yet been formally charged as of the day he submitted it. (Tr. 61-64.) 
 
During a personal subject interview (PSI) in March 2014, Applicant admitted that 
he was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI) in February 2014 and DWI in 
March 1991. He told the investigator that he did not disclose his two alcohol-related 
arrests on his two SCAs because he was not aware that he needed to disclose them. 
He also told the investigator that he had not consumed alcohol since his DUI arrest in 
February 2014 and does not intend to consume alcohol in the future. (GX 2 at 5-6.) At 
the hearing, he testified that he consumes alcohol about once a month but does not 
drink to intoxication. (Tr. 32.) 
 
In his August 2013 SCA, Applicant answered “No” to following financial 
questions: “Have any of the following happened? In the past seven (7) years, you had 
bills or debts turned over to a collection agency? In the past seven (7) years, you have 
been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered.” (GX 5 at 34.) In his 
February 2014 SCA, he answered “No” to the same questions. (GX 1 at 33.) 
 
 Applicant’s February 2014 credit bureau report (CBR) reflected the six delinquent 
debts that are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 3.a-3.f. He attributed his financial problems to his 
marital breakup, which left him unable to make the payments on the home mortgage 
and his credit card accounts. (GX 2 at 7.) 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b allege the same debt, a delinquent charge account with an 
electronics store. The debt was sold to another lender and then referred for collection 
for $4,001, after it became more than 150 days delinquent. Applicant testified that his 
last payment on this debt was in 2011, and that the collection agency had no record of 
the debt. (Tr. 39-41.) The debt is not resolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 3.c alleges mortgage loan payments totaling $14,667 that were more than 
150 days past due. Applicant testified that he had a buyer for a short sale but the lender 
would not approve it. He owed about $221,000, and the house sold for about $186,000 
at a foreclosure sale. He has not had any contact with the creditor. The debt is not 
resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 3.d alleges a charge account with an online retail store that is more than 
120 days past due for $204. In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant 
asserted that the debt was satisfied in 2013, but he did not provide any documentation 
to support his assertion. (Tr. 45.) The debt is unresolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 3.e is a telecommunications bill for $137, referred for collection in January 
2014. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant asserted that this debt was satisfied. At the 
hearing, he testified that he did not return the equipment when he canceled his contract. 
He contacted the service provider on the day before the hearing, but he provided no 
documentation showing that the debt is being resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 3.f alleges a $775 debt to a discount retail store that became past due 
more than 150 days and was referred for collection in January 2014. In his answer to 
the SOR, he stated that the debt was resolved. At the hearing, he testified that he 
resolved the debt for about $485, but he provided no documentation to support his 
testimony. (Tr. 41-42.) 
 
During his March 2014 PSI, Applicant told the investigator that he inadvertently 
omitted his delinquent debts in his August 2013 SCA. (GX 2 at 7.) In his response to the 
SOR, he admitted falsifying his two SCAs and stated, “I have no reason but 
embarrassment.” At the hearing, he testified that he did not disclose any delinquent 
debts in his SCA because he had not been contacted by his creditors and did not think 
he owed them anything. (Tr. 52.) However, on cross-examination, he admitted that he 
should have disclosed the foreclosure of the mortgage on the family home, and he 
testified that he did not know why he did not disclose his delinquent debts in his SCA. 
(Tr. 54-55.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
5 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested on or about February 2, 2014, and 
charged with DUI (SOR ¶ 1.a), and that he was arrested in March 1991 and charged 
with DWI (SOR ¶ 1.b). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability 
and trustworthiness.”  
 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 AG ¶ 22(a) is established by Applicant’s DUI and DWI convictions. AG ¶ 22(c) is 
established, because the evidence reflects that both incidents were the result of heavy 
drinking before driving. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 AG ¶ 23(a) is established. Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses were not recent or 
frequent. The first incident occurred more than 14 years ago, and the most recent 
incident occurred 21 months ago.  
 
 AG ¶ 23(b) is applicable to the extent that Applicant has acknowledged his 
alcohol-related conduct and moderated his alcohol consumption. He has never been 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent or as an alcohol abuser.  
7 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR, as amended, alleges that Applicant was arrested in January 1991 and 
charged with misdemeanor destruction of private property (SOR ¶ 2.a). It also cross-
alleges the DUI and DWI offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b (SOR 2.b). 
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” Applicant’s two alcohol-related convictions establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are established. Applicant’s most recent DUI conviction 
was 21 months ago, and he has moderated his alcohol consumption. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling about $23,785. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
8 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his CBR establish two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) 
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions 
under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant attributed his financial problems to his 
marital breakup, a condition beyond his control. However, he has not acted responsibly. 
He never contacted the lender for the home mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 3.c after 
the mortgage was foreclosed. He failed to return equipment to the telecommunications 
provider alleged in SOR ¶ 3.e, and he did not contact the provider until the day before 
the hearing.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. He has not sought or received financial 
counseling, and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Although Applicant claimed that he resolved the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 3.a, 3.b, 3.d, and 3.f, he provided no documentation to support his 
claim. 
9 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. Furthermore, he has not disputed the CBRs reflecting the debts he 
claimed to have resolved. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to disclose the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 3.a-3.f when he submitted his February 2014 and August 2013 SCAs (SOR ¶ 
4.a); failed to disclose his February 2014 DUI and March 1991 DWI arrests in his 
February 2014 SCA (SOR ¶ 4.b); and failed to disclose his DUI and DWI arrests in his 
August 2013 SCA (SOR ¶ 4.c). It also cross-alleges the criminal conduct in SOR ¶ 2.a 
under this guideline (SOR ¶ 4.d). 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition for Applicant’s failure to disclose his DWI and 
DUI arrests and his delinquent debts is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, 
or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . .” 
Applicant admitted the allegations of falsification in his answer to the SOR. At the 
hearing, he first testified that he was unaware of the debts because he had not been 
contacted, but admitted that he should have disclosed the debts related to the 
foreclosure of the mortgage on his home. However, he stopped short of admitting 
intentional falsification. I have treated his testimony as a denial of intentional 
falsification. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business experience are 
relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security 
clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 
2010). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant abandoned his earlier inconsistent explanations for not 
disclosing his delinquent debts in his two SCAs. He admitted that the financial questions 
were clear and straightforward, and that he should have disclosed his delinquent debts. 
I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
10 
 
 For the reasons set out in the above discussion of Guideline G, I conclude that 
Applicant’s DWI and DUI arrests, cross-alleged under this guideline, establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under Guideline E:  
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant did not disclose his delinquent debts 
until he was confronted with the evidence in his March 2014 PSI. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established for Applicant’s falsifications. They were not “minor,” 
because falsification of a security clearance application “strikes at the heart of the 
security clearance process.” ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App .Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) They 
were not infrequent, because he falsified two SCAs and was less than candid during his 
PSI. His falsifications did not occur under unique circumstances. However, this 
mitigating condition is established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and 
11 
 
cross-alleged under this guideline, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
Guideline G. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is not established for Applicant’s falsifications, because he has not 
unequivocally acknowledged his behavior. It is established for DWI and DUI arrests, for 
the reasons set out in the above discussion of Guideline G. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established for Applicant’s DWI and DUI arrests, because he has 
fully disclosed them. Although he has equivocated about his falsification of his SCAs, 
his CBRs have fully disclosed financial problems to his supervisors and security 
officials. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G, J, F, and E in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each of the above guidelines, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his alcohol-related arrests and convictions, but 
he has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems and 
falsifications of his SCAs. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
12 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a-4.c:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 4.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
