 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04964 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 5, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on July 23, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the 
 
2 
 
FORM on August 4, 2015. As of October 7, 2015, he had not responded. The case was 
assigned to me on October 13, 2015. The Government exhibits included in the FORM 
are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 65-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2002. He is married with an adult child.1   
 
Applicant stated that his finances were stable until 2012 when his father-in-law 
became sick. Applicant helped pay some of his father-in-law’s medical expenses, and 
Applicant and his wife traveled on numerous occasions to another state to visit his 
father-in-law. In 2013, Applicant’s mother became sick. He helped with her medical 
expenses and traveled to a third state to visit his mother. Applicant’s daughter was in 
college. Her roommate stole money from his daughter’s bank account and property from 
their apartment. In addition to the normal costs of a child in college, Applicant incurred 
additional expenses replacing his daughter’s stolen property.2  
 
The SOR alleges 26 delinquent debts. However, the January 2014 credit report 
indicates that Applicant was only an authorized user for the delinquent $3,977 debt 
alleged in SOR 1.t. The balance of the remaining delinquent debts total about $38,000. 
The debts include a past-due second mortgage loan, a defaulted student loan, credit 
card accounts, telecommunications debts, and 13 medical debts totaling about $8,200. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts. Credit reports from January 2014, August 2014, 
and July 2015 also substantiate the debts.3   
 
Applicant reported his financial issues on his December 2013 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86). He wrote that he retained a law firm “to help [him] 
restructure [his] debt in forms of lowering interest amounts and updating accounts to 
become current.” He stated that he was working with the law firm to negotiate with his 
creditors, and he would address his debts one at a time. He also wrote that he and his 
wife planned to sell the house that his wife inherited from her parents in about six to 
eight months and use the proceeds to pay their debts.4 
 
Applicant discussed his finances and his delinquent debts during his background 
interview in February 2014. He did not mention the law firm. He stated that he 
inadvertently reported that he had used a financial credit counseling service when he 
had not. He stated that his wife handled most of the family’s finances, and she had a 
better grasp on their finances than he did. He stated that he inherited his mother’s 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 8.  
 
2 Items 2, 8.  
 
3 Items 2, 5-7.  
 
4 Items 4.  
 
 
3 
 
house, and he would sell the house after it cleared probate.5 He anticipated receiving 
about $50,000 from the sale, which he would use to pay his debts.6 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR in March 2015. He stated that the house his 
wife inherited from her parents was for sale, and that they planned to use the proceeds 
to pay most of their debts. He wrote that he started repaying his student loan. He stated 
that he cosigned the student loan for his daughter, but the credit reports indicate the 
loan was solely in his name. He did not provide any documentation of his payments. 
The August 2014 credit report lists the loan with a $9,301 balance. The July 2015 credit 
report lists the loan with a $9,716 balance and a $25 payment made in June 2015.7 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he retained a law firm (a 
different law firm than the one identified in the SF 86), and that he “consolidated most of 
his bills into one payment.” He did not provide a copy of the contract with the law firm or 
how much he was paying. He provided settlement agreements negotiated by the law 
firm for the $1,144 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i and the $3,977 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t, 
which is the debt in Applicant’s wife’s name with Applicant as an authorized user.8  
 
The settlement agreement for the $1,144 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i called for a 
settlement of $413, payable in five monthly payments of $82 from January through May 
2015. The July 2015 credit report indicates the balance was $731, which is $413 less 
than the previous balance of $1,144. I am satisfied that this debt is resolved. He did not 
provide any documentation to corroborate any payments toward the $3,977 debt. The 
debt is not listed on the August 2014 and July 2015 credit reports.9 
 
The January 2014 credit report indicated that Applicant’s primary mortgage loan 
was $5,593 past due with a $55,800 balance. The loan was modified under a federal 
government plan. The August 2014 credit report indicated Applicant was current on his 
payments under the modified plan. The July 2015 credit report lists an additional 
delinquent debt of $3,205 to a payday loan institution. It listed the first delinquency on 
the loan as occurring in August 2014.10 
 
                                                          
5 OPM did not take a statement from Applicant. The interview was summarized in a report of investigation 
(ROI). It is possible that Applicant was talking about his mother-in-law’s estate and the ROI misstated it as 
his mother’s. 
 
6 Item 8.  
 
7 Items 2, 5-8.  
 
8 Items 2, 4-8.  
 
9 Items 2, 4-8.  
 
10 Items 5-7. The mortgage loan and the delinquent payday loan were not alleged in the SOR. Any matter 
that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be used in 
assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in determining the applicability of mitigating conditions, 
and when conducting the whole-person analysis. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant was only an authorized user for the delinquent $3,977 debt alleged in 
SOR 1.t. That allegation is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
  The medical problems in Applicant’s family and his daughter’s victimization by 
her roommate were beyond Applicant’s control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
The 13 medical debts alleged in the SOR are mitigated. Those allegations are 
concluded for Applicant. Applicant established that he settled the $1,144 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i for $413. That debt is resolved and mitigated. His wife may have settled the 
$3,977 debt that was in her name with Applicant as an authorized user. Applicant 
brought his primary mortgage loan current through a modification, and he has made at 
least one $25 payment towards his student loan. However, he has a new $3,205 
delinquent debt from a payday lender.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l-1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.z:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
