1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04089
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant:
Ryan C. Nerney, Esquire
The Edmunds Law Firm
November 17, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on May 22, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.) On November 7, 2014, the Department
of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) concerning Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The date referred to in the Transcript at page 7 is incorrect. That date, December 3, 2014, is when Applicant1
retained counsel. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 13, 2015 (Answer), and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  Department Counsel was prepared1
to proceed on April 27, 2015. This case was assigned to me on May 4, 2015. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 11,
2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 16, 2015. The Government offered
Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified
on his own behalf, and he submitted Applicant Exhibits A through J, which were also
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June
24, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 56, divorced, and has bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He is
employed by a defense contractor and seeks to retain a security clearance. Applicant
denied all the allegations of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support
his retention of a security clearance.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he purchased and used marijuana while holding a security
clearance.
Applicant first used marijuana from 1982 through 1987. During that time he used
it several times a week. Applicant stopped using marijuana in 1987 and did not use it
again for over 20 years. In 2009 Applicant used marijuana on a single occasion.
Applicant used marijuana after being granted a security clearance in 1984.
(Government Exhibit 1 at Section 23, Exhibit 2 at 3; Tr. 38-41.) 
Concerning the event in 2009, he testified:
My wife, at the time, had gone to a yard sale and bought a jewelry box,
and when she came home, she discovered a small amount of green
substance, and she asked me what it was, and I smelled it, and I identified
it as marijuana. And then I put it away. I didn’t dispose of it right away, and
then later on that night I got curious, and had a momentary lapse of
judgment and I smoked it, about two puffs, and after that, you know, as
soon as I smoked it, I regretted it, because I had a lot of paranoia. (Tr. 25.)
(See Tr. 44-45, 48-49.)
3
Applicant has not used marijuana since 2009 and evinces a credible intent not to
use marijuana in the future. He submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation. (Applicant Exhibits A and B; Tr. 26-28.)
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges that Applicant’s conduct in using marijuana while
holding a security clearance is cognizable under this paragraph. 
Mitigation
Applicant attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings four to five times a week,
and has since 2003. He has sponsored several people during his time at AA, and is
well-respected by people in the program. He has been receiving professional psychiatric
care for two years. His psychiatrist states, “Although he has a remote history of alcohol
and marijuana use, there has [sic] been no incidents of relapse during the time I have
been seeing him. I do not believe, at this time, that he requires any formal type of drug
rehabilitation.” (Applicant Exhibits D, E, G, and J at 1, 4; Tr. 28-29, 46.)
Applicant is a respected worker and colleague. His performance evaluations from
2010 through 2014 reflect that he consistently meets or exceeds expectations.
(Applicant Exhibit F.)
Applicant stated that two co-workers who wrote letters for him know of his drug
use. He is described by them as a person who is “truthful and honest,” “without guile or
deceit.” (Applicant Exhibit J at 2-3; Tr. 33, 49.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
5
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant used marijuana from 1982 through 1987, and once in 2009, when
holding a security clearance. Both of the disqualifying conditions have application to this
case.
Applicant has, however, overcome the Government’s case. His use was
infrequent, the most recent use happened six years ago after over 20 years of
abstinence, and it is very unlikely to recur. He informed DoD about his use in 2009, both
on his questionnaire and in an interview, and credibly states that he will not use
marijuana or other drugs in the future. Guideline H is found for Applicant. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.
6
I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially
considered the following:  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress, such as
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
personal, professional, or community standing. . . .
I have also considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, with particular
emphasis on the following:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused the untrustworthy,
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to
recur.
Applicant’s conduct in using marijuana as described above while holding a
security clearance was untrustworthy behavior. The incidents were minor in nature, are
very unlikely to recur, the most recent occurred six years ago, and do not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Applicant has mitigated the single allegation under this guideline. Paragraph 2 is
found for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My comments under Guidelines H
and E, above, should be viewed under the whole-person concept as well. Applicant’s
conduct was not appropriate for a security clearance holder. However, under AG ¶
2(a)(3), Applicant’s conduct is not recent, last occurring about six years ago. Based on
the state of the record, I find that there have been permanent behavioral changes under
AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I find that there is little potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)), and that there is also little
likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use and
personal conduct. 
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations
expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
