The Government submitted 11 items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)     ISCR Case No. 14-05741
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On December 23, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated June 11,
2015.  Applicant received the FORM on August 19, 2015. Applicant did nor submit1
information in response to the FORM.  Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted  the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) with explanations. (Item 2) She denied one
allegation, that of 1.c, and provided an explanation.
Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is a high
school graduate, single mother with one child. (Item 3) She has worked for her
employer since 2011. She completed a security clearance application in 2013. 
The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling $8,419. (Item 1) The allegations
include failure to file her federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2012 and
2013, collection accounts and default judgments. (Items 4-6)
Applicant attributes her delinquent debts to bad credit decisions when she was
younger.  She was unemployed while pregnant from February to April 2011, and was
employed part time from 2004 to 2007 with a private company. She understands that it
is her ultimate responsibility to negotiate or resolve the debts.  She stated that she is
working to improve her financial profile. She states that she is current with her bills and
is not receiving any government assistance. She also states that she is a law abiding
citizen with no criminal record. (Item 2 and 11)
As to the SOR allegation at 1.a for failure to file Federal tax returns for tax years
2012 and 2013, Applicant admitted the late filing and stated that they should be filed by
February 2015. She did not provide any documentation to support this claim.  
As to the SOR allegation at 1.b for failure to file state income tax returns for tax
years 2012 and 2013, Applicant admitted the late filing and stated that she is in the
process of filing them. Again she stated that they should be filed by February 2015.
There is no evidence in the record that she has filed the returns. 
As to the alleged debt at 1.c, Applicant denied the debt in her answer. She
claims that this is a duplicate of another debt in 1.g for $2,322 to a furniture store. She
did not provide any documentation to support this claim. There is no evidence of any
payments made on the account. 
As to the SOR allegation at 1.d, for $1,060 to a power company, Applicant
admitted the debt. There is no evidence of any payments made on the account. (Item
5) It has been delinquent since 2012.
Applicant admitted the debt at SOR 1.e, for a medical account in the amount of
$554. She stated that she was arranging a payment plan for this debt, but she did not
provide any evidence to support the claim. The account has been delinquent since
2010. (Item 5)
3
As to the SOR allegation at 1.f, for a 2011 judgment in the amount of $645,
Applicant admitted the debt, but the records show that it has not been satisfied. She
stated that it was a balance from an apartment lease and she is trying to contact them.
The SOR allegation in 1.g is a judgment in the amount of $2,670. The judgment
was filed in 2011. She states that this is a duplicate of the account listed as 1.c, but
there is no documentation to substantiate this claim. 
As to the debt at 1.h, in the amount of $101, Applicant admitted the debt and
stated that she was arranging a payment, but there is nothing in the record to support
her claim. It is listed as unsatisfied on her credit report. (Item 6) She also stated that the
debt at 1.I is the same type of debt and that she was arranging a payment. There is
nothing in the record to support this. Her credit report lists the judgment as not satisfied.
(Item 6)
As to the SOR allegations at 1.j and 1.k, they are owed to the same cable
company, $361 and $375 respectively. Applicant admitted the debts and stated that
they would be paid by April 2015. She did not provide any documentation of payments.
Applicant stated that the delinquent account in 1.l has been paid. This is listed as
2014 judgment in the amount of $214. She did not provide any evidence to support this
claim. 
Applicant estimates her monthly net  income as approximately $800 to $1,200.
She has about $1,500 in monthly expenses. This leaves her with a negative net
remainder each month. There is no information concerning financial counseling. (Item
11)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
5
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” It also
states that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant incurred delinquent debt in the amount of about $8,322. She
also failed to file Federal and State tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. In addition AG ¶ 19(g) ( failure
to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the
fraudulent filing of same) applies. With such conditions raised, it is left to
Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant notes that she made poor decisions. She still owes the
delinquent debt. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition
(FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances) does not apply. Applicant was unemployed for a short time, but
she did not provide any nexus between the unemployment and lack of payments.
She has not provided documentation of any payments on the debts or the filing
of the income tax returns. Thus, she has not acted responsibly under the
circumstances.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications
that the problem is being resolved or is under control) does not apply.
 Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person
factors. Applicant is 24-years old. She is a single mother. Applicant is employed, but
she provided no information that she has paid any delinquent debts or that she has
entered a payment plan. There is no evidence showing she filed her state and federal
income tax returns for 2012 and 2013. She admits the debts and stated that she will
pay the debts, but that is not sufficient. She has not met her burden in this case.
Applicant did not provide any documentation that she has addressed her debts,
despite her intentions to do so. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the
Government. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the financial
considerations guideline.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l: Against Applicant
7
 Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
