 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 14-03918 
            ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant provided sufficient information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline C 
for foreign preference. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. On May 1, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). After reviewing the results 
of the background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On November 10, 2014, the 
DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
foreign preference under Guideline C. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 4, 2014. He denied the allegations, 
that as a dual citizen of Italy and the United States, he exercised his Italian citizenship 
by accepting Italian educational and medical benefits, residing in Italy to meet Italian 
citizenship requirements, and maintaining a bank account in Italy. He admitted that he 
voted in an Italian election in 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 7, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on September 17, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a Notice of Hearing on 
September 30, 2015, for a hearing scheduled for October 15, 2015. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. The Government introduced three exhibits I marked and admitted 
into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3. Applicant 
and one witness testified. Applicant introduced seven exhibits I marked and admitted 
into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through G. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing on October 23, 2015.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Applicant requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts concerning 
Italy. He provided U.S. State Department documents concerning Italy (AX A and AX B). 
I will take administrative notice of facts concerning Italy as noted in my Findings of Fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, the testimony, and the exhibits, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 28 years old. He is a high school graduate with some college credits. 
He has been employed by a United States electronics company since March 2012. He 
worked for the company as a technician for approximately three years in a European 
country. He is now employed as a field service representative by the company in the 
United States since October 2014. (Tr. 18-20, 42-44; GX 1, e-QIP, dated March 14, 
2013) 
 
Applicant’s father, a United States citizen, was a member of the U.S. military 
assigned in Italy when he met and married Applicant’s mother, an Italian citizen. 
Applicant, the oldest of four brothers, was born in Italy. Applicant’s father was later 
assigned to a base in the United States and Applicant and his parents moved to the 
United States. Applicant’s mother received a permanent resident green card, and 
worked for a U.S. company while the family was in the United States. After 
approximately a year, Applicant’s father was again assigned by the U.S. military to Italy. 
After a number of years on this assignment, Applicant’s father accepted a job with a 
U.S. company contracted to do work for the U.S. military on a U.S. military base in Italy. 
Applicant’s father still works for the DOD contractor in Italy. His mother is employed as a 
nurse for an Italian hospital. (Tr. 20-23) 
 
Applicant lived most of the first 25 years of his life in Italy. He and his three 
brothers were born and raised in Italy. Applicant and his brothers are considered dual 
 
3 
 
 
citizens of Italy and the United States because of his birth in Italy to an Italian mother 
and a U.S. citizen service member serving in Italy. He also has a stepbrother who was 
born in the United States and lives in the United States. Applicant’s father registered 
Applicant’s birth with the U.S. officials in Italy as required and he has a U.S. birth 
certificate. He has only had a U.S. passport and never had an Italian passport. 
Applicant and his family always had access to the U.S. military bases in Italy. He would 
go to U.S. military bases in Italy a few days a week. He celebrated U.S. holidays on the 
bases, and particularly liked celebrating the Fourth of July on the U.S. bases. He 
enjoyed celebrating with his family and friends the U.S. holidays of Thanksgiving, 
Christmas, Labor Day, and Memorial Day. He was a young boy when the United States 
invaded Iraq and he was excited and proud to see all of the deployment activities and 
movements on the U.S. bases. Applicant watched movies made in the United States 
and followed U.S. sports. (Tr. 23-26, 34-38; AX F, U.S. Facilities Access Pass, dated 
August 14, 2008) 
 
Applicant has one brother who is a staff sergeant on active duty in the U.S. Air 
Force stationed at an air base in the United States. He has two brothers who live with 
their parents in Italy. One of these brothers is a college student studying computers and 
the other brother is still in high school. His brother in college plans to move to the United 
States for employment when he completes college. Applicant believes that when his 
brothers come to live in the United States, his parents will follow their sons.  
 
Applicant has an Italian identification card, which he turned over to his facility 
security officer (FSO). He has no friends or relatives that are part of the Italian 
government. He has no allegiance to the Italian government, and he never agreed with 
their politics. Applicant is willing to renounce his Italian citizenship. He has not done it 
yet since he has not had the opportunity. Italian citizenship cannot be renounced while 
living in Italy. An application to renounce Italian citizenship can only be submitted by a 
person living outside Italy. Applicant only recently moved from Italy to the United States. 
He was told by his company’s security officials that renouncing his Italian citizenship 
now may highlight that he is being considered for a U.S. security clearance. (Tr. 30-34; 
AX E, Letter, dated September 24, 2015) 
 
Applicant and his brothers were educated through high school in the Italian 
education system. The Italian education system is similar to the U.S. system. It is free 
public education paid by taxes and all Italian children are eligible for the education. As 
dual citizens of Italy and the United States, Applicant and his brothers were eligible to 
attend the Italian schools. Because of their education in the Italian school system, 
Applicant and his brothers are fluent and literate in both English and Italian. (Tr. 35-37, 
40-41) 
 
Applicant has received medical treatment and benefits from the Italian medical 
system as well as from the U.S. military medical system on the U.S. bases. The Italian 
medical system is paid through taxes and is available to all Italian citizens. As the 
dependent of a U.S. service member and contractor serving overseas, Applicant was 
 
4 
 
 
eligible for treatment in the U.S. military medical system. He used the medical system 
that was most available to him. (Tr. 32-34, 38-39, 42-43) 
 
Applicant voted in the Italian parliamentary elections in 2010. He was 23 years 
old, and he felt a civic duty as an Italian citizen to participate in the elections. He felt 
comfortable with his knowledge of Italian politics to cast a vote. He cannot vote in Italian 
elections again since he relinquished his Italian identity card to his FSO. (Tr. 38-40) 
 
Applicant at one time had a bank account in Italy. He no longer has an Italian 
bank account and all of his funds are in U.S. banks. (Tr. 32; AX C, Bank Statement, 
dated October 7, 2015; AX D, Bank Statement, dated October 7, 2015) 
 
Applicant’s brother enlisted in the Air Force in 2009 from a U.S. air base in Italy. 
He plans to reenlist in 2016. He has a security clearance at the Top Secret/Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (TS/SCI) level. Applicant is two years his senior. He and 
Applicant had the same upbringing in Italy. They watched U.S. television, followed U.S. 
sports, and celebrated U.S. holidays. They attended Italian public schools for their 
education, and used Italian and U.S. medical facilities. His entire family is proud to be 
U.S. citizens and they are loyal to the United States. He believes his brother is a person 
of high character, good reliability, and sound judgment.  
 
Applicant presented seven letters of recommendation from his supervisors and 
fellow employees. They all attest to Applicant’s professionalism, competence, good 
work performance, and good behavior. They note he is hard working, and willing to 
assist any member of the staff. They state he is diligent, reliable, mature, and honest. 
They recommend that he be granted eligibility for access to classified information 
because of his integrity and reliability. (AX G, Letters, Various dates) 
 
Italy is one of the closest allies of the United States on the European continent. 
The U.S. enjoys warm and friendly relations with Italy, and Italy is a steadfast and active 
transatlantic partner. The U.S. and Italy foster democratic ideals and international 
cooperation, especially in the areas of strife and civil conflict. The U.S. partnership with 
Italy is one of the strongest since Italy is a leader in peacekeeping and military 
operations around the world. Italy is host to over 30,000 U.S. military and civilian 
personnel on some of the largest and most important U.S. military bases in Europe. Italy 
also works closely with the United States to combat drug trafficking, human trafficking, 
and terrorism. Italy has been an early and active partner in the fights against Isil and 
Ebola. Italy and the United States belong to and closely cooperate in the same 
international organizations. Italy is a global leader in nuclear nonproliferation and works 
closely with the United States to keep nuclear material out of the hands of terrorists. 
President Obama recently said: 
 
“The United States would not be what we are or who we are without the 
contributions of generations of Italian American. Italy, of course, is one of 
our closest and strongest allies. And any time Italians and Americans get 
 
5 
 
 
together it’s also a chance to celebrate the deep bonds of history and 
friendship and family.” 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. (AG ¶ 9) The principal 
goal of the foreign preference assessment is to determine the risk, based on foreign 
associations, that information may be compromised if access to sensitive information is 
granted. It is not a measure of Applicant’s loyalty to the United States. 
 
Applicant was born in Italy and is a dual citizen of Italy and the United States. He 
has only a United States passport but he does hold an Italian identification card. He was 
educated in Italian schools and received Italian medical benefits. At one time he had an 
Italian bank account and voted in an Italian election. These facts raise the following 
foreign preference disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 10: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits form a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizen requirements); and (7) voting in a foreign 
election.  
 
I considered the following foreign preference mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 These mitigating conditions apply. Applicant is considered a dual citizen of Italy 
and the United States because he was born in Italy to a U.S. serviceman father 
stationed in Italy and an Italian mother. He was raised in a U.S. environment on U.S. 
military bases in Italy and followed U.S. customs and lifestyle. Applicant expressed his 
willingness to renounce Italian citizenship, but he has not had the opportunity under 
Italian law to do so. He received free Italian educational benefits available to all Italian 
 
7 
 
 
students when he was a minor because he attended Italian schools through high 
school. He was eligible for and took advantage of medical benefits from both the United 
States and Italy. The Italian medical benefits are free and available to all Italian citizens. 
Applicant’s birth certificate was issued by U.S. authorities and he never had an Italian 
passport. He always had a U.S. passport. He had an Italian identification card, which he 
turned over to his FSO. He no longer has an Italian bank account and all of his funds 
are in U.S. banks. He voted once in an Italian election when he was in his early 20s, but 
he is no longer eligible to vote in Italy because he does not have an Italian identification 
card in his possession. Applicant works for a U.S. company, and he now resides in the 
United States. He does not plan to reside in Italy. Applicant presented sufficient 
information to establish that he has a stronger preference for the United States than for 
Italy. Applicant mitigated security concerns based on foreign preference. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Applicant is a dual United States and Italian citizen by his birth in Italy to a U.S. 
service member father and an Italian mother. He lived a U.S. lifestyle on U.S. military 
bases in Italy even though he attended Italian schools. He never held an Italian 
passport but only a U.S. passport. He always worked for a U.S. company and he 
resides now in the United States. His brother is a U.S. service member, raised like 
Applicant on U.S. military bases in Italy, who has been granted eligibility for access to 
classified information. It is noted that Italy is one of the United States strongest and 
closest allies. Applicant established a deep and longstanding preference for the United 
 
8 
 
 
States. These facts leave me without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated any foreign preference for Italy. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
++ 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
