 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03751 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 4, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 13, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 23, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for August 20, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He did not submit any additional documentation. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 31, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since December 2012. He is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. He attended college for a period, but he did not earn a degree. He is 
married with three children, ages 26, 22, and 19.1 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
1993, and his debts were discharged in 1994. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy again in 
2003, and his debts were discharged the same year. He had additional financial 
problems after the bankruptcy.2 
 
 The SOR alleges the two bankruptcies, two unpaid judgments totaling $5,645, 
and 13 delinquent debts totaling $26,827. Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($21,373), 1.j ($438), and 1.o ($323). He stated that he was unable to admit 
or deny owing the remaining debts as he did not recognize the creditors. Credit reports 
from November 2012 and June 2014 substantiate the debts.3 
 
 Applicant stated that his first bankruptcy resulted from having three young 
children without medical insurance. He also stated that he and his wife got “quite a bit in 
debt with [the medical expenses] and a couple of vehicles and some other things.” He 
stated that he was told he could file bankruptcy and “make it all go away.” He stated that 
immediately after the 1994 bankruptcy, he “was given all this credit and it snowballed 
and it got right on top of [him] again, and it was so easy the first time, [he] fell right back 
into it the second time.”4 
 
 Applicant bought a motorcycle in 2004. In about 2005, he lost his job because of 
a failed drug test.5 There is no evidence of any additional drug use. The motorcycle was 
repossessed in about 2005. The $21,373 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for a loan on 
another vehicle that was repossessed.6 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 49; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 26; GE 2-5. 
 
3 Tr. at ; GE 2-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-20, 46; GE 2. 
 
5 The failed drug test was not alleged in the SOR. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be 
used for disqualification purposes. It may be used in assessing how it affected Applicant’s finances, when 
determining the applicability of mitigating conditions, and when conducting the whole-person analysis. 
 
6 Tr. at 20, 27-28, 50, 52; GE 2, 4, 5.  
 
3 
 
 Seven of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling $3,115, were medical 
debts. The remaining debts were from what appears to be a pawn shop (SOR ¶ 1.d - 
$600), trash-collection services (SOR ¶ 1.f - $236), a credit card (SOR ¶ 1.j - $438), a 
payday loan (SOR ¶ 1.n - $745), and a returned check from a grocery store (SOR ¶ 1.o 
- $323). Applicant established that he paid the $236 trash-collection-services debt (SOR 
¶ 1.f) in 2012.7 
 
 The judgments were awarded against Applicant in 2006 and 2007. Applicant 
stated that he did not recognize the plaintiffs in the cases. With the exception of the paid 
trash-collection-services debt, Applicant has not paid any of the debts or judgments 
identified in the SOR. He stated that a number of the debts were uncollectable because 
of the statute of limitations.8  
 
 Applicant stated that for years after 2007 or 2008, he did not buy anything if he 
could not pay for it with cash. He stated that he currently lives within his means, and he 
is attempting to rebuild his credit. He recently bought a house. With the exception of the 
paid trash-collection-services debt, none of the debts alleged in the SOR are listed on 
Applicant’s current credit reports, predominantly because of the age of the debts. There 
are no other derogatory accounts listed on his current credit reports. He has not 
received formal financial counseling.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
                                                          
7 Tr. at 17-19, 23-24, 44-45; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 21-22, 25-26; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
9 Tr. at 22-23, 47-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4, 5; AE A-D. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s first bankruptcy resulted from having three young children without 
medical insurance. That was beyond his control. His subsequent financial problems  
were caused by overspending and the loss of a job because of a failed drug test. Those 
events were not beyond his control. 
 
 Applicant paid a $236 debt in 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.f). That debt is mitigated. The 
medical debts are not readily identifiable, and they do not appear on Applicant’s most 
recent credit report. Those debts are mitigated. Applicant has done a good job the last 
few years of curtailing his spending and paying his current bills, but he ignored his 
longstanding debts. He has not paid any of the other debts, including the $323 debt to a 
grocery store for a returned check. He is relying on the statute of limitations and that the 
debts are no longer listed on his credit report. However, reliance on the statute of 
limitations does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve debts. See e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 14-01231 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2015). Moreover, the judgments may still be 
enforceable.  
  
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is only applicable to the first bankruptcy. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.m:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n-1.o:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
