 
1 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03884 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has unpaid delinquent 
obligations resulting from a repossessed vehicle, collection accounts, and delinquent 
obligations. Financial considerations remain a security concern. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 On March 23, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. 
DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On April 1, 2015, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 27, 2015, I was assigned the case. On June 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
16, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing convened on July 6, 2015. I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
(Ex) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibit A, without objection. Applicant and his wife 
testified at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. (Tr. 8) No additional material was received. On July 14, 2015, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied two debts, which totaled 
approximately $400. He admits the remaining eight delinquent SOR debts, which 
totaled approximately $25,000. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 68-year-old aircraft mechanic who has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 1993, and he is seeking a security clearance. (Tr. 29) He 
honorably served in the U.S. Army. (Ex. 1, Tr. 28) From 1967 through 1969, he served 
two tours in Vietnam. (Tr. 26) In July 1969, he separated as a corporal (E-4). (Tr. 26) He 
receives $1,100 monthly from the U.S. Department of Veteran’s Affairs due to Agent 
Orange. (Tr. 39) 
  
Applicant divorced in 1999, remarried in 2013, was together for two or three 
months before divorcing, and then remarrying in 2015. (Tr. 24) He has three children 
and a step-son ages 26, 26, 27, and 37. (Tr. 33) He pays for utilities and for a car for his 
daughter who is in college. (Tr. 34) There is no rent or mortgage on the house she lives 
in because her great aunt owns the home. (Tr. 47) 
 
 Applicant is diabetic and three or four years ago he blacked out and was 
hospitalized. (Tr. 34) He also had a stroke, was hospitalized a several days, and was 
unemployed for a month. (Tr. 35)  
 
 In January 2008, Applicant cosigned with his step-son on a $25,000 car. (Tr. 17) 
His step-son failed to make the $526 monthly payments on the vehicle as agreed. (Ex. 
2, 3) The vehicle was repossessed, sold, and $16,873 (SOR 1.a) remains owing on the 
loan. Applicant asked his step-son about the debt and the step-son said he would take 
care of the debt, but failed to do so. (Tr. 18) His credit reports indicate the last activity 
on the loan occurred in October 2011. (Ex. 2, 3) Applicant asserts the creditor offered to 
settle for $6,000 or $7,000.He provided no documentation supporting this claim.  
 
 In May 2009, Applicant purchased furniture (SOR 1.b, $2,496) and agreed to 
make $145 monthly payments toward the debt. (Tr. 22) His credit report indicates that 
over time that he had six other accounts with the same creditor that were all “paid as 
agreed.” (Ex. 2) He had a payday loan (SOR 1.c, $719) charged off. (Tr. 23) His credit 
report indicates that over time he had 11 accounts with this same creditor that were all 
“paid as agreed.” (Ex. 2)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 Applicant had a credit card account (SOR 1.d, $353) charged off and two 
accounts placed for collection (SOR 1.e, $3,652 and SOR 1.f, $1,563). (Tr. 23-25) He 
has no knowledge about this last debt. (Tr. 25) He denied two other accounts (SOR 1.g, 
$200 and SOR 1.h, $197). (Tr. 25, SOR Answer) Both debts are listed on his February 
2014 credit report. (Ex. 2) Two medical copayments of $50 each (SOR 1.j and SOR 1.k) 
were placed for collection. (Tr. 25) 
 
 Applicant is current on two car payments. One payment is $300 monthly on a 
2008 vehicle and the other payment is $500 monthly on a 2013 vehicle. (Tr. 38) His 
third vehicle, a 2001 truck, is paid for and has more than 400,0002 miles on it. (Tr. 38) 
He receives income of approximately $6,000 monthly to meet his expenses. (Tr. 40) His 
monthly social security benefit is $1,900, his VA disability is $1,100, and he takes home 
$3,000 from his job. (Tr. 43) After paying expenses, he has approximately $1,500 
remaining each month. (Tr. 43) In May 2015, Applicant sought the services of a credit 
repair service. (Ex. A) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
2 Applicant initially worked at a Navy installation until it closed and the work was moved to another Navy 
facility. His commute from home to work is approximately 80 miles and an hour and a half each way. (Tr. 
28)  
 
4 
 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. A vehicle repossession resulted in 
an unpaid debt of approximately $17,000 and he has other delinquent accounts totaling 
approximately $8,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to present any documents indicating he had made payments on 
his delinquent obligations. There are no repayment agreements nor is there a showing 
Applicant has had recent communication with the SOR creditors. He denied two SOR 
debts, but both debts appear on his credit report. No additional evidence of payment 
was provided following the hearing.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s numerous delinquent obligations remain unpaid. 
The nature of the debts are not so unusual that they are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant divorced and remarried a number of times. He also had a 
stroke three or four years ago and was out of work for a month. These are events 
beyond his control. However, he failed to show how these events impacted his current 
finances. He has approximately $6,000 monthly income and after expenses he has 
approximately $1,500 remaining monthly. He provided no documentation showing that 
even the two $50 medical copayments have been paid. He has been employed since 
1993 with no periods of unemployment. AG & 20(b) does not mitigate the security 
concern. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) Applicant failed to explain any financial counseling he has 
received. There is no clear indication his finances are under control. He failed to show 
any payments on his delinquent obligations or that he has established repayment 
agreements with the creditors. The mitigating factors listed in AG & 20(c) do not apply. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 The lack of documentation also prevents the application of AG ¶ 20(d) “[T]he 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” A mere intention to repay debts without documentation establishing repayment 
is insufficient to warrant applying this mitigating condition.  
 
Applicant denied two delinquent obligations, which are on his credit report, 
totaling approximately $400. There is no evidence of a dispute having been filed. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply because the mitigating factor requires there be a reasonable basis 
to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
there must be documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. No documentation was received.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
the U.S. military in hostile territory and that Agent Orange has caused him disabilities. 
He has worked for his employer for more than 22 years. Additionally, almost 70 percent 
of the delinquent debt relates to the repossessed vehicle he co-signed for with his step-
son.  
 
In March 2015, Applicant received an SOR informing him of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent financial obligations. In May 2015, he sought the 
assistance of a credit repair service. He has paid none of the delinquent accounts. He 
has failed to establish a meaningful track record in paying his delinquent obligations. 
  
The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish 
that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him 
to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken 
 
7 
 
 
 
significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of 
Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan 
is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment 
on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. The repossessed vehicle debt and other delinquent obligations 
have yet to be addressed. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
