 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-05409
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:  Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by her deliberate
attempts to engage in tax fraud. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is
denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 18, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Department Counsel also provided a copy of the letter forwarding to Applicant advance copies of Gx. 1 - 54
(Hx. 1) and a list identifying Gx. 1 - 5 (Hx. 2).
 Department Counsel’s email forwarding Ax. D and waiving objection thereto is included as Hx. 3.5
2
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  2
On February 6, 2015, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative
guidelines (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct3
(Guideline E). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on July 9, 2015, and I convened a hearing on
August 6, 2015. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5.  Applicant testified and presented4
Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - C. I left the record open after the hearing to receive
additional relevant information. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August
17, 2015. The record closed on August 28, 2015, when I received Applicant’s post-
hearing submission that is included, without objection, as Ax. C.5
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant failed to timely file her
state tax returns, or pay taxes due, for tax years 2005 - 2007 (SOR 1.a); that she owes
$10,816 for a state tax lien filed against her in 2010 (SOR 1.b); that she failed to timely
file federal tax returns, or pay taxes due, for tax years 2006 and 2007 (SOR 1.c); and
that she owes $32,716 for a federal tax lien filed against her in 2011 (SOR 1.d). Under
Guideline E, the Government cross-alleged as personal conduct Applicant’s failure to
file and pay taxes alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.c (SOR 2.a). 
Applicant admitted with explanation the allegations at SOR 1.b and 1.d. She
denied the remaining SOR allegations. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s
admissions, and based on all available information, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 52 years old and since June 2008, has been employed in an
information technology (IT) position by a defense contractor. Her job requires eligibility
for a position of trust because her employer supports management of the health care
system used by members of the military, and Applicant must be found suitable to be
entrusted with personally identifiable information (PII) associated with the health care
system’s constituents. Applicant worked in similar jobs outside the defense industry
starting around 1997. In August 2007, Applicant was fired from her job of ten years with
 The book, “Vultures in Eagle’s Clothing: Lawfully Breaking Free from Ignorance Related Slavery,” was written6
in 1997 by Lynne Meredith. In 2002, she and others were arrested and charged with numerous federal crimes
relating to income tax fraud, mail fraud, and conspiracy to commit those crimes. In June 2005, she was
sentenced to ten years imprisonment in a federal penitentiary.  See United States v. Meredith, 685 F.3d 814
(9th Cir. 2012) cert. denied, 133 S.Ct. 563 (U.S. 2012).
 W esley Snipes, renowned for his roles in films such as “U.S. Marshals,” “W hite Men Can’t Jump,” Major7
League,” and “Blade,” was charged in 2006 with federal tax fraud, and was convicted in 2008 of failing to file
his federal income tax returns. Mr. Snipes was sentenced to three years in prison. See Snipes v. U.S., 611
F.3d 855 (11  Cir. 2010), cert. denied, 131 S.Ct. 2962 (U.S. 2011).th
3
a nationally-known IT corporation for misusing her corporate credit card. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Tr. 47 - 52) 
Applicant earned an associates’ degree in management information systems in
May 1994. She is nearly finished with her studies for a bachelor’s degree. Applicant was
married from May 1986 until divorcing in September 1988. She has three children, all
now adults, whom she raised by herself. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 54 - 55)
Applicant has worked for most of her life, including holding jobs in high school.
She makes in excess of $100,000 annually in her current field. She has always been
aware of her federal and state income tax reporting obligations. Other than in the years
alleged in the SOR, Applicant reported and paid her taxes as required. Nevertheless,
Applicant did not file her federal or state income taxes as alleged in the SOR. She did
so because in 2005, her sister told her about a book that purported to establish a legal
way to avoid paying income tax.  Although Applicant did not read the book, or only read6
parts of it, she decided to change her income tax withholding status to “exempt” and she
stopped filing her federal and state income tax returns. Applicant testified that she was
reinforced in the propriety of her actions by a telephone conversation with someone
from the IRS. It appears that conversation occurred as a result of an IRS inquiry about
the change in Applicant’s tax withholding status, and Applicant insists the IRS
representative referred to the need to close “that loophole.” Applicant did not present
anything to explain or corroborate her claim in that regard. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 37 - 44, 55
- 58, 82 - 89)
In 2008, Applicant became alarmed by the fact that a famous movie star  had7
been convicted and jailed for failing to timely file his income taxes. In July 2008,
Applicant retained the services of a tax debt resolution firm to assist her in preparing her
past-due tax returns and establishing repayment plans with both state tax authorities
and the IRS. Payments were made on a regular basis from 2008 until sometime in
2010, when Applicant learned that the firm had stopped providing the services for which
she had paid. She started working with H&R Block and was able to bring current all of
her past-due federal and state tax return filings by June 2010. She also re-established
repayment plans for all of her past-due tax obligations. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. B; Ax.
D; Tr. 28, 45 - 47, 60 - 75)
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 8
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 9
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 10
 Directive, 6.3.11
  “(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,12
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
4
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In8
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also9
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.10
Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense determination based
on examination of all available relevant and material information,  and consideration of11
the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions
must also reflect consideration of the factors, commonly referred to as the “whole-
person” concept, listed in the guidelines at AG ¶ 2(a).  The presence or absence of a12
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against
them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of eligibility for a
position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. 
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect sensitive information as his or her
own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access should be
resolved in favor of the Government.
 The mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(f) are not pertinent to these facts and circumstances.13
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed
at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of
not meeting financial obligations); 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of
trust);and 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.13
Applicant’s information, particularly her post-hearing submission, shows she has
resolved her tax delinquencies and brought her filing status current with both state and
federal tax authorities. She is not likely to repeat her conduct in this regard. However,
the fact that she would so recklessly decide that she could avoid her tax obligations and
6
attempt to defraud the Government for personal gain creates doubt about her judgment
and reliability that are not easily resolved. In 2008, Applicant’s efforts to resolve her tax
delinquencies were motivated by a fear of going to jail, as had a famous movie star. In
none of her explanations for her conduct did she express an understanding that she had
shirked her income reporting and tax paying obligations as a U.S. citizen. The “good
faith” attached to her corrective efforts is attenuated by the fact she was motivated by
fear of punishment rather than an acceptance of her responsibilities and a recognition of
her errors in judgment. 
Based on the foregoing, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the Applicant’s
conduct was recklessly fraudulent and continues to reflect poorly on her trustworthiness
and judgment. AG ¶ 20(c) applies, because the problem – Applicant’s unfiled returns
and resulting tax debts – are being resolved. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because the
“good faith” aspect of Applicant’s resolution efforts is shallow, at best. On balance,
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns about her failure to meet her
tax reporting and payment obligations.
Personal Conduct
Available information also established trustworthiness concerns about Applicant’s
personal conduct. That concern is expressed at AG ¶ 15, as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, Applicant’s willingness to engage in tax fraud requires
application of the following AG ¶ 16 disqualifying conditions:
b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative; and
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
Applicant provided false information to government representatives when she
claimed to be exempt from tax withholding in 2005. She relied on that misrepresentation
to avoid reporting her income and paying her taxes. She did so without any good-faith
basis for thinking her conduct was legal. By her own account, she did not read the book
7
her sister told her about, and she did not corroborate her claim that a phone call with the
IRS confirmed there was a legal basis for her actions.
By contrast, AG ¶ 17 lists the following conditions that, if established, might
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns about Applicant’s conduct:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and
(f) association with persons involved in criminal activities has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply for the same reasons expressed regarding AG ¶
20(d), above. Likewise, I have reservations about the applicability of AG ¶ 17(d);
Applicant’s acknowledgment of her taxpayer responsibilities is elusive and does not
inspire confidence that she will continue to meet her obligations in the future. AG ¶ 17(b)
does not apply because Applicant did not substantiate her claim that an IRS official
conformed that her actions were legitimate. The book to which she was referred, and
which she may or may not have read, was written by a person who was convicted of,
and imprisoned for, tax fraud. As to AG ¶ 17(c), Applicant’s conduct was anything but
minor. It was tantamount to an effort to defraud the Government for personal gain. Such
conduct goes to the heart of the Government’s need to ensure each person in whom it
reposes its trust is reliable and has the requisite good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(e) and 17(f)
are not pertinent to these facts and circumstances. On balance, Applicant did not
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns about her personal conduct.
8
 
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guidelines E and F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of
the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has resolved her delinquent tax
debts and income tax returns. However, this information is not sufficient, in light of the
record evidence as a whole, to overcome the doubts raised by her willingness to
engage in such conduct in the first place. Because protection of the interests of national
security is the principal purpose of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP
eligibility is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
