 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03591 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Dave F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was honest and forthcoming in his 2014 security clearance application 
(SCA) and disclosed his past illegal drug use and his omissions in his 2005 SCA. He 
acknowledged his mistakes and demonstrated his intent to comply with the law, rules, 
and regulations. Moreover, it shows Applicant’s current maturity, judgment, and his 
desire to be truthful, reliable, and honest. He mitigated the drug involvement and 
personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA on April 6, 2014. The Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline H (drug involvement) and Guideline E (personal conduct) on February 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
23, 2015.1 Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 9, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 17, 
2015, scheduling a hearing for August 20, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits (GE 1 and 2). Applicant 
testified and submitted seven documents. (AE A through G) AE D though G were 
admitted for the limited purpose of taking administrative notice of an alleged social trend 
toward the decriminalization of marijuana use. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection and made part of the record. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
August 28, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.d, which he denied. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence, and 
having considered Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:   
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 2001, received his bachelor’s degree in 2005, and completed his 
master’s degree in business administration in 2010. He has never been married, and he 
does not have any children. He is engaged to be married sometime in 2016. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana during high school in the late 1990s, and he 
used hallucinogenic mushrooms twice during his first year of college in 2002. He denied 
using any other illegal drugs, including marijuana, while attending college.  
 
During his last two summers in college, Applicant participated in internship 
programs with a federal contractor, and was offered a position immediately after his 
graduation. The federal contractor had a policy against its employees using drugs, and 
Applicant was required to participate in a drug-testing program before both of his 
internships and before he was hired.  
 
Applicant submitted his first SCA in September 2005. He failed to disclose in his 
2005 SCA that he illegally used marijuana in the late 1990s and hallucinogenic 
mushrooms in 2002. Applicant explained that he did not consider himself a drug user, 
and because it was three years since his most recent use of illegal drugs, he did not 
consider it or did not think about his past use of illegal drugs when he completed his 
2005 SCA. (Tr. 36) Shortly thereafter, he was granted eligibility for a secret clearance. 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Applicant testified that he never had access to classified areas, classified information, or 
worked with people who had access to classified information. 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana twice in 2010; once at a concert and the 
second time while visiting a friend’s home. He claimed that he only took a puff on both 
occasions. He also illegally used medications without a prescription. Applicant has 
diagnosed recurrent back problems and pain. He explained that in 2007 - 2008, his 
mother gave him twice what he believes was a prescription medication (Vicodin or 
hydrocodone), and in two other occasions, a friend gave him hydrocodone for back 
pain. In 2011, Applicant illegally used what he believed was cocaine. He testified that he 
felt uncomfortable and disappointed at himself after he used the cocaine and he 
regretted it immediately. He promised not to use illegal drugs again. 
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer, a federal contractor, in 2012. He 
likes his current job and believes that he has been successful at it. In his current job, 
Applicant works with classified information and interacts with co-workers who also are 
involved with classified information. He participated in periodic training about his duties 
and responsibilities to be eligible to possess a security clearance. As a result of his work 
with classified information, Applicant now understands the importance of maintaining his 
eligibility to possess a security clearance, protecting classified information, and 
demonstrating good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in April 2014. He disclosed in his 2014 
SCA all of his illegal drug-related behavior from the late 1990s to 2011. Applicant 
explained that, as a result of working with classified information and the training he 
received, he understood that he omitted important information from his 2005 SCA. He 
repeatedly averred he did not intend to falsify his 2005 SCA or to mislead the 
Government. He was immature and did not pay attention to detail. Applicant disclosed 
his 2005 SCA omissions in his 2014 SCA because he wanted to have a clean start and 
to be transparent in his relationship with the Government. Applicant wants to establish 
and maintain a reputation for being truthful, honest, and responsible.  
 
Applicant attributed his past use of illegal drugs to his immaturity, curiosity, and 
his desire to fit in with his peers. He has removed himself from the social setting where 
illegal drugs are used. He still has infrequent contact, in the form of emails and text 
messages, with some of his illegal drug-using friends. However, he has not had 
personal contact with them in a long time. Applicant credibly testified that he no longer 
wants to place his life, his job, and his fiancée at risk because of his past drug use.  
 
Applicant has changed his lifestyle to fit in with his current professional work 
environment and with his live-in fiancée. He has known his fiancée since 2012, and they 
have plans to get married in the near future. He no longer considers the use of illegal 
drugs part of his life. He expressed remorse and regret for his past illegal use of drugs. 
He promised that he will never use illegal drugs in the future. To demonstrate his 
commitment, he signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
any violation. He believes that he has invested too much in his career, his profession, 
and his relationship to risk losing it all because of the use of drugs.  
 
Applicant’s employer has a policy against its employees using illegal drugs. 
Applicant’s co-workers lauded his dedication, reliability, judgment, honesty, and work 
ethic. He is considered to be a driven professional and an exemplary leader who makes 
significant contributions to his team. His co-workers endorse his eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Between 2007 and 2011, Applicant illegally used marijuana (twice in December 
2010), hydrocodone (four times between 2007 and 2008), and cocaine (once in 2011). 
At the time of his illegal drug use, Applicant possessed a secret security clearance 
granted to him in 2006. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes three drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug abuse;”2 
“(c) illegal drug possession . . . ;” and “(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides two potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
  Both mitigating conditions apply and mitigate the drug involvement security 
concerns. Applicant’s illegal drug-related behavior was infrequent and occurred almost 
four years ago (2011). Applicant disclosed in his 2014 SCA his history of illegal drug 
use from the late 1990s to 2011. Moreover, he disclosed that he omitted from his 2005 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
SCA his illegal drug use from the 1990s to 2002. Applicant credibly explained that he 
wanted to have a clean start and to be transparent in his relationship with the 
Government. Applicant wants to establish and maintain a reputation for being truthful, 
honest, and responsible. Because of his current maturity, change of lifestyle, and 
professional behavior, I believe that his use of illegal drugs is unlikely to recur. His past 
use of illegal drugs does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment.  
 
  Applicant has made lifestyle changes and avoids associating with his past drug-
using friends and contacts. He is living with his fiancée who does not use illegal drugs. 
They are in a stable relationship and have new professional friends and acquaintances 
that do not use illegal drugs. Moreover, Applicant signed a statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
  Applicant acknowledged his mistakes and attributed them to his inexperience 
and desire to be accepted by and fit in with his friends. He now understands the 
adverse criminal and security clearance consequences that he will face if he is involved 
with any illegal drugs in the future. He believes that he has invested too much in his 
education, relationship, and profession to risk it all by using illegal drugs.  
 
  Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s past use of illegal 
drugs are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant illegally used drugs infrequently from the late 1990s until 2011. He 
omitted relevant and material information from his 2005 SCA when he failed to disclose 
his illegal use of marijuana while in high school and his use of mushrooms as a 
freshman in college.  
 
  Applicant’s omissions and his illegal drug use trigger the applicability of the 
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists five conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 Applicant disclosed his illegal use of drugs and corrected his 2005 SCA 
omissions when he submitted his 2014 SCA. The Government had no independent 
knowledge of Applicant’s prior use of illegal drugs, or that he omitted information from 
his 2005 SCA until his disclosures in his 2014 SCA. Applicant attributed his failure to 
disclose the information to his lack of familiarity with the security clearance system, his 
lack of attention to detail, and his immaturity.  
 
 Applicant’s disclosure of his past illegal drug use and of his omissions in his 2005 
SCA demonstrate an acknowledgment of his mistakes. It also shows his intent to 
comply with the law, rules, and regulations. By disclosing the information, Applicant 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. Moreover, it shows 
Applicant’s current maturity, judgment, and his desire to be truthful, reliable, and honest.  
 
 For the above reasons, and those discussed under Guideline H, incorporated 
herein, I find that AG ¶ 17 ¶¶ (b), (c), (d), and (e) partially apply and mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my 
whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. His past illegal drug 
use is not recent. He has established a reasonable period of abstinence and a change 
of lifestyle. His work performance and reference statements give substance to his 
promise to never use drugs again. He clearly understands the possible adverse 
consequences he will face if he is ever involved in the use of illegal drugs. He 
specifically understands that he could be fired from his job, and his eligibility for a 
security clearance may be revoked. 
 
Applicant was honest and forthcoming in his 2014 SCA and disclosed his past 
illegal drug use and his omissions in his 2005 SCA. He acknowledged his mistakes and 
demonstrated his intent to comply with the law, rules, and regulations in the future. 
Moreover, it shows Applicant’s current maturity, judgment, and his desire to be truthful, 
reliable, and honest. After weighing all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement and 
personal conduct security concerns.      
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
