1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-06282
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on January 27, 2012. The Department of Defense (DOD)
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) on February 7, 2015, detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 2.2
2
Applicant received the SOR, and he submitted a notarized, written response to
the SOR allegations dated April 1, 2015. He requested a decision on the written record
in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on August 18, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on
August 26, 2015. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response dated
September 15, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned
this case to me on October 13, 2015. The Government submitted six exhibits, which
have been marked as Items 1-6 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to
the SOR and the SOR have been marked as Item 1. His written response to the FORM
is admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibit A (AE A).
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and
2.f of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied
the factual allegations in ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.h, 2.o, and 2.p of the SOR. In his response to
SOR ¶¶ 2.c - 2.e, 2.i - 2.n and 2.q, Applicant denied any knowledge of outstanding
medical bills and asked for time to investigate. As to SOR ¶ 2.g, he indicated that he
thought this debt belonged to his father, and he would investigate. His responses to
these SOR allegations are deemed a denial.  He also provided additional information to1
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 49 years old, works as a technician foreman for a DOD
contractor. He began his current employment in December 2011. He worked in private
industry as a HVAC technician from November 2005 through December 2011. He was
unemployed from November 2001 until November 2005. During this time, he cared for
his ailing father.2
Applicant completed high school in 1985. He and his wife married in December
2005. He and his wife have a 10-year-old daughter and an 8-year-old son. His son is
Item 2; Item 3.3
Item 3.4
Item 2.5
Item 1.6
3
legally disabled and has been since birth. He has a 15-year-old step daughter and a 21-
year-old step son.3
Beginning in 2007, Applicant and his wife began to fall behind in their bills. In July
2010, Applicant and his wife retained the services of credit-repair company to help them
gain control of their finances. Their relationship with this company ended in November
2013. Under the terms of their agreement with the credit-repair company, Applicant and
his wife paid this company $352 a month, and the company worked to resolve their
debts. The debts included in the payment plan through the credit-repair company are
not specifically identified. However, Applicant provided a copy of his payment history.
This document shows his payments to the credit-repair company, and debts paid by this
company. Applicant also submitted settlement offers from several creditors, and the
payment history shows these debts were paid by this company. I have carefully
reviewed the payment history; the account numbers listed next to the creditor payment;
the name of the creditors paid; and the credit reports in the record.4
The SOR identified 17 purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by credit
reports from 2012 and 2014, totaling approximately $19,733. Some accounts have been
transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection agents. Some accounts
are identified by complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial
account numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits and in others
eliminating other digits.
When Applicant completed his e-QIP in January 2012, he acknowledged that he
owed past due debts. He denied filing bankruptcy and having an issue with gambling.
He filed his tax returns each year. He advised that he hired a credit-repair company to
help resolve his debts. Applicant listed 15 past-due debts on his e-QIP and identified the
status of each debt to the best of his knowledge.  Of these 15 debts, eight are listed on5
the SOR.6
As previously indicated, Applicant submitted his debt-payment history. Through
this document, he verified that he paid six debts, totaling $4,119, listed on his e-QIP and
not included on the SOR. These payments are verified by the 2012 and 2014 credit
reports in the record. The payment history also reflected that Applicant paid at least nine
other creditors. While the creditors are listed for payment purposes, some creditors are
not the original creditor. Many of these creditors and the original debt owed are not
identified on any credit report. For purposes of this decision, Applicant has established
Item 3.7
Item 1; Item 2; Item 5; Item 6; AE A.8
Item 3; Item 6.9
Item 1; Item 3; Item 5; Item 6; AE A.10
Item 5; Item 6; AE A.11
4
that he paid nine creditors for debts not listed in the SOR. Some of these debts may
relate to medical bills.7
Of the 17 SOR debts, ten debts relate to medical bills for his disabled son. (SOR
¶¶ 2.c - 2.e, 2.i - 2.n, and 2.q) In his response, Applicant indicated that he was not
aware of these debts. He did list three of these medical debts on his e-QIP. The 2014
credit report identifies only three medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c - 1.e). The September 2015
credit report submitted by Applicant does not list any outstanding medical bills.
Applicant advised that he has private insurance as well as medicaid to pay for his son’s
medical care. With both insurances, his son’s medical care is generally 100% covered.
He stated that he was working with his insurance companies on resolving any open
medical accounts.  8
Applicant’s payment history documentation from the credit-repair company
shows that he paid the $544 credit card debt in SOR allegation 2.a in 2011; that he paid
the $515 credit card debt in SOR allegation 2.b in 2011; that he paid the $138 debt in
SOR allegation 2.h in 2011; and that he paid the $789 debt in SOR allegation 2.p in
2012. The account numbers on the payment history match the account numbers on the
credit reports.9
In his response, Applicant stated that he thought the $3,646 debt in SOR
allegation 2.g belonged to his father. A careful review of the record documents indicated
that this debt is Applicant’s account. He listed it on his e-QIP. The 2014 credit report
shows that the debt is a paid charged-off account. The September 2015 credit report
shows that payments were made on this account and that it is paid and closed.
Applicant has resolved this debt. Based on the record evidence, the debts in SOR
allegation 2.f ($5,783 judgment) and 2.o ($4,654) remain unpaid. The judgment is listed
on the September 2015 credit report, and Applicant advised that he was working to
resolve this debt in his response to the SOR. The $4,654 debt is not listed on the 2014
or 2015 credit reports.  10
The 2014 and 2015 credit reports do not show new, unpaid debts. The unpaid
debts listed in the SOR and on the 2012 and 2014 credit reports occurred between
2007 and 2011. Applicant did not submit a budget showing his monthly income and
expenses.11
5
In his response to the SOR, Applicant acknowledged that he failed to answer the
interrogatories apparently mailed to him in September 2014. The SOR does not allege
that his action was intentional, and the record lacks any evidence that Applicant refused
to respond or otherwise cooperate with discovery. Outside of the allegation, this issue is
not discussed nor does the record contain any evidence related to this allegation. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.  
 
6
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility:
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination.
For AG ¶¶ 15(b) to apply, the Government must establish that Applicant
deliberately or intentionally refused to answer the interrogatories mailed to him in
September 2014. The record lacks any evidence showing that Applicant deliberately or
intentionally refused to answer the interrogatories. A simple failure to answer is
insufficient to establish the Government’s burden of proof. Allegation 1.a is found in
favor of Applicant.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
7
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems between 2007 and 2011. Most
of the debts had not been shown as resolved when the SOR was issued. These two
disqualifying conditions apply.
The financial considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant did not explain how his debts became delinquent. Thus, AG ¶ 20(b) is
not applicable. From the information in the record, Applicant’s debts occurred primarily
from 2007 through 2009. In 2010, he and his wife retained the services of a credit-repair
company to help resolve their debts. By 2013, Applicant had resolved many of his
outstanding debts. On his behalf, the credit-repair company contacted Applicant’s
creditors and negotiated settlements, which it then paid on hia behalf,using money from
hispayments into the plan. The actions of the credit-repair company on behalf of
Applicant show a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. His finances are under control as
shown by the lack of new past-due debts. He has worked to resolve his debts since
2010 and has been able to do so. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
8
  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
9
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
hole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. His
unemployment played a role in his later financial problems, but the medical issues of his
young son created significant financial issues for him between 2007 and 2011. He and
his wife recognized that they needed help with their finances and sought the assistance
of a credit-repair company. They made a good decision in 2010 to seek help. Over the
next three years, they resolved many of their debts through this company. They
established a track record for resolution of their past debts and a track record for paying
their current bills, as they have not incurred significant, unpaid debt for the last four
years. They showed good judgment when they took control of their debts and by their
current prudent financial management. They have a special needs child, who will always
require additional resources from them. Applicant is working to resolve the judgment,
but has not yet done so. The $4,654 debt is unknown to Applicant and absent from his
recent credit reports. The reason for the removal of this debt from his credit report is
unknown, but it is reasonable to believe that the credit-repair company my have
successfully challenged it as not belonging to Applicant. These debts cannot be a
source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his
debts are paid: it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness
to hold a security clearance. While some debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to
raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances and
personal conduct under Guidelines F and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.q: For Applicant
10
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
