 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01899 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 17, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On March 30, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 24, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on July 15, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and Items 5 through 8 are 
admitted into evidence. Applicant provided additional documents that are marked Items 
A through N, which are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on October 14, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g and denied the 
remaining allegations. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is a college graduate. Applicant married in 1996 
and has a ten-year-old child.1 He was employed in the past as a government 
subcontractor. In 2013, he became an employee of a government contractor.2  
 
 Applicant owned a commercial property and operated a retail business on that 
property beginning in approximately 1997. His wife managed the business. He worked 
there on the weekends and helped with its maintenance. He continued to work full time 
at his primary job. He paid all of his creditors on time. Due to an economic downturn 
over a period of years, the business became unprofitable, and in September 2013 the 
property was placed on the market for sale. The business closed its doors in December 
2013.3 
 
Applicant hired an attorney in June 2014 to assist him in resolving the debts 
associated with the business. After reviewing Applicant’s financial situation and various 
alternatives for addressing his debts, on his attorney’s advice, he decided not to file 
bankruptcy, but rather seek to pay and settle the debts through a payment strategy 
devised by his attorney. Based on his attorney’s advice, he changed realtors and more 
aggressively priced the property to achieve a quicker sale.4  
 
The property sold in September 2014. The year that the property was on the 
market, it did not produce income, and it was a challenge for Applicant to pay the 
monthly mortgage of $5,600 from his personal account to avoid foreclosure on the 
property. He was unable to maintain payments on other accounts at that time. When the 
property sold, it was for less than was required to pay all of his debts. Applicant used 
the proceeds of the sale to pay the existing mortgages, taxes, and other closing costs, 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Items 5, B, and M. 
 
3 Items 4, 6, A, B, D, and N. 
 
4 Items 4, 6, A, B, D, and N. 
 
3 
 
 
along with various other accounts and expenses. Applicant satisfied the business debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.o that totaled approximately $18,873. He also satisfied 
other debts that were not alleged in the SOR.5  
 
With respect to the remaining debts, Applicant’s attorney advised him to refer all 
creditor communication to him so he could attempt to negotiate or otherwise resolve the 
remaining debts. As part of the strategy, Applicant and his family also agreed to live 
within their means and remain current on their ongoing financial obligations. Since 
employing the strategy, Applicant has settled and paid the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.a 
(balance $15,848, settled $4,755).6  
 
Applicant’s attorney provided a sworn affidavit, noting that in his experience, the 
strategy employed to resolve the debts takes time and it is not unusual to still be 
resolving debts for more than a year. He noted Applicant and his wife have accumulated 
$32,000 in savings, together with a portion of Applicant’s future wages, available to 
resolve the debts. His attorney is optimistic that the debts can be resolved without the 
need to file bankruptcy.7 
 
Applicant’s attorney is working with all of the remaining creditors to resolve the 
debts alleged in the SOR that total approximately $74,200 (SOR ¶1.b through ¶1.g). 
Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $152,000. He saves approximately $1,500 
monthly. He takes full responsibility for the unpaid accounts. He has revised his budget 
to minimize expenses, which allows him to increase the debt-resolution fund created for 
repayment of his debts. He is selling furniture and inventory items from his former 
business. His wife, who previously had managed the business, is seeking traditional 
employment while starting a side business to sell food items. He intends on resolving all 
of the remaining debts.8  
 
Applicant provided character statements. In them, he is described as trustworthy, 
honest, reliable, professional, honorable, and dependable. He is a valued asset and 
exercises good judgment.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 Item 4 at 2-28; Items A, B, D, and N. Along with Applicant’s admissions, the alleged debts are supported 
by credit reports in Items 7 and 8. 
 
6 Item 4 at 2-28; Item C. 
 
7 Items B, D and N. 
 
8 Items B, D and N. 
 
9 Items E through M. 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant had 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately $108,921 that he was 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.o because he 
provided proof that he paid the debts. He admitted the debts in SOR ¶ 1.a through 1.g. 
 
6 
 
 
He provided proof he resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant provided sufficient 
evidence to conclude that the debts alleged in the SOR were due to the results of an 
economic downtown in the business market that impacted his retail business. That 
event was beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), he must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant put the property on the market for sale 
in September 2013. He continued to pay the mortgage on the property from his 
personal account because the business was not generating income. This caused him to 
fall behind on other debts. When the property failed to sell, he hired an attorney who 
helped him develop a strategy to sell the property and resolve his debts. Applicant 
changed realtors and aggressively priced the property to sell. Upon the sale, many 
debts associated with the business were paid. He was advised to live within his means 
and accumulate savings in a debt resolution account that would then be used by his 
attorney to negotiate payments of the remaining debts. He has been following this plan. 
Applicant intends to resolve the remaining debts through this plan. Applicant has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. AG ¶ 20(a) only partially 
applies because the remaining debts are current and unresolved, but occurred under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur.   
 
 Applicant sought financial counseling through his attorney and has a strategic 
plan for resolving the remaining debts. He paid eight debts and settled one. He is 
accumulating funds in a debt-resolution account so his attorney can assist him in 
resolving the remaining six debts. There are clear indications that Applicant is resolving 
his debts and his finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant paid the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.o, and settled the debt in ¶ 1.a, demonstrating a good-
faith effort to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. Applicant did not 
dispute any of the debts alleged. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
7 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. Due to an economic downturn he accumulated debts 
associated with a retail business. He chose not to file bankruptcy, but rather chose to 
see the assistance of his attorney to develop a strategy to resolve his debts. He has 
already resolved nine of the fifteen debts alleged. He is accumulating funds in a debt-
resolution account so his attorney can negotiate with the remaining creditors to resolve 
the debts. He is not required to have paid each debt, but rather only needs to 
demonstrate he has an established plan and has taken significant action to implement 
the plan. Applicant has done this. His plan is both credible and realistic. Other than the 
debts associated with his business, it does not appear he has a history of financial 
instability. Applicant did not ignore or avoid his financial responsibilities, but rather 
sought assistance and chose to address his debts in a responsible, systematic manner. 
I am confident that he will continue his plan to resolve all of his remaining debts. The 
record evidence does not leave me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
