 
1 
 
 
             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06305 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lawrence Miller, Esq. 
 
 
November 10, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts, in the total amount of 
$37,338. He resolved one of them. The rest of his debts remain unresolved. The 
additional security concern raised by Applicant’s failure to disclose his debts on his 
electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) was not mitigated. Applicant failed to 
mitigate both the financial concerns and the personal conduct concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 27, 2014, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On January 19, 2015, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 19, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 31, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 12, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 9, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled, but was continued on that date to September 11, 2015, at the 
request of Applicant’s attorney. The hearing was reconvened on September 11, 2015. 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. GE 2 through GE 4 were admitted 
over Applicant’s objections. GE 1, GE 5, and GE 6 were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered three exhibits marked Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A through C. AE A was admitted into evidence despite objection by Department 
Counsel. AE B and AE C were admitted without objection from Department Counsel. 
The record was left open for receipt of additional documentation. On September 18, 
2015, Applicant presented nine additional pages of documentation, marked collectively 
as AE D. Department Counsel had no objections to AE D, and it was admitted. The 
record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 21, 
2015.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing, I amended the SOR pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17, in order to 
conform to the evidence, by rewording SOR allegation 2.a,. Neither Department 
Counsel nor Applicant had objections to the amendment. (Tr.61-63.) The allegation is 
amended from: 
 
2.a  You falsified material facts on an Electric Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), executed by you on January 24, 2014, 
in response to “Section 26 - Financial Record Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts Other than previously listed, have any of the following 
happened? In the past seven (7) years, . . .you had bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you 
are the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or 
guarantor) . . . you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, 
or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? (Include financial obligations for 
which you are the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a 
cosigner or guarantor) . . .you have been over 120 days delinquent on any 
debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which you 
were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or 
guarantor) . . . You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? 
(Include financial obligations for which you are the sole debtor, as well as 
those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor),” you answered “Yes” 
and listed only a resolved mortgage foreclosure; whereas in truth and as 
you sought to conceal, you had at least those financial delinquencies as 
set forth in paragraph 1, above. 
 
 
3 
 
To: 
 
2.a  You falsified material facts on an Electric Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), executed by you on January 24, 2014, 
in response to “Section 26 - Financial Record Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts Other than previously listed, have any of the following 
happened? In the past seven (7) years, . . .you had bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you 
are the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or 
guarantor) . . . you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, 
or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? (Include financial obligations for 
which you are the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a 
cosigner or guarantor) . . .you have been over 120 days delinquent on any 
debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which you 
were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or 
guarantor) . . . You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? 
(Include financial obligations for which you are the sole debtor, as well as 
those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor),” you answered “No;” 
whereas in truth and as you sought to conceal, you had at least those 
financial delinquencies as set forth in paragraph 1, above. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He is a high school graduate and has attended some 
college. He has worked as an employee of a government contractor for the past 25 
years and has held a security clearance for the duration of his employment. He is 
married. He has a son and a stepson. (GE 1; Tr. 50-53, 64-68.)  
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Applicant is 
alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts, in the total amount of $37,338. Applicant admitted 
the debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a, and 1.c through 1.l. He denied the debts 
listed in 1.b, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o, because he believed he paid them in full. He denied 
falsifying his e-QIP as alleged in SOR subparagraph 2.a. The alleged debts were listed 
on credit reports dated November 10, 2014; July 20, 2015, and September 8, 2015. (GE 
3; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
Applicant attributes his debts to his wife’s medical conditions and her inability to 
work due to those conditions. From 2009 to present, his wife has suffered from 
numerous ailments. In 2009 she required surgery and underwent a lengthy recovery. 
After her recovery, she was unable to find work and spent a significant amount of time 
caring for her elderly parents. In 2013 Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with another 
debilitating medical condition that left her unable to drive. She presently attends 
physical therapy three times per week to treat her conditions. While Applicant’s wife 
 
4 
 
used to be the main contributor to their household income, she is now unable to work 
due to her medical conditions. (AE A; Tr. 23-26.) 
 
Applicant’s $37,338 in SOR-alleged delinquent debt consists of: two delinquent 
student loans for which Applicant co-signed totaling $14,825 that have been delinquent 
since 2013 (SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c); six unsecured consumer debts totaling 
$20,189 (SOR subparagraphs 1.b, and 1.d through 1.h); and seven medical debts 
totaling $1,467 (SOR subparagraphs 1.i through 1.o). His medical debts date as far 
back as 2009 and remain unresolved. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 45.)  
 
Of his 15 alleged debts, Applicant has resolved only one. He presented 
documentation that shows he resolved the $8,758 debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 
1.b in full on August 6, 2015. (AE C; GE 6.) He also presented a letter from a medical 
creditor that noted he paid a debt in full on February 16, 2015. However, he failed to 
provide an account number or any other documentation that showed the debt resolved 
matched up to any debt alleged in the SOR. (AE B.)  
 
Applicant testified that he was attempting to resolve his debts, as his resources 
would allow, one by one. He claimed to have resolved from $25,000 to $30,000 in debt 
in the past three years, but did not provide documentation to substantiate this claim. He 
also testified that he only intended to resolve the debts in which the creditor was 
currently interacting with him. He drew a distinction between debts that had zero 
balances because they had been charged off and the debts that were still in active 
collections. He indicated that he had to choose whether to pay his current living 
expenses or resolve his debts. (TR. 29-41.) 
 
Applicant is current on his mortgage. He has not participated in financial 
counseling. He works overtime to earn extra money to cover his living expenses. (Tr. 
36, 66.) 
 
In Applicant’s June 27, 2012 e-QIP, Section 26 asked “Other than previously 
listed, have any of the following happened? In the past seven (7) years, . . .you had bills 
or debts turned over to a collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you 
are the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor) . . . you 
had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed? (Include financial obligations for which you are the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you are a cosigner or guarantor) . . .you have been over 120 days delinquent 
on any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which you were 
the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor) . . . You are 
currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial obligations for which 
you are the sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor).” He 
claims he answered “No,” because he had previously provided a list of his delinquent 
debts to his security officer. He thought that those debts were previously disclosed to 
his security officer and did not need to be identified on the e-QIP because they were 
excluded by the question. He presented a letter to his security officer and a copy of the 
derogatory financial information he filed with his security officer, but those documents 
were dated September 17, 2015. (GE 1; AE D; Tr. 27-28, 49-53.) 
 
5 
 
Applicant testified he received an employment-based performance award eight to 
ten years ago. (Tr. 65-66.) The record lacks other evidence concerning the quality of 
Applicant’s professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his 
track record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security 
procedures. No character witnesses provided statements describing his judgment, 
trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was delinquent on fifteen debts, in the total amount of $37,338. He 
resolved one debt, totaling $8,758. His medical debts date back to 2009 and he has 
demonstrated little effort to resolve them since then. He demonstrated both a history of 
not addressing debts and an inability or unwillingness to do so over a substantial period. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following Financial Considerations mitigating conditions (MC) under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant incurred substantial delinquent debt over the past six years, which 
continues to date, despite his full employment and significant overtime hours. He 
offered no evidence from which to establish a track record of debt resolution. He 
claimed that he resolved $25,000 to $30,000 in debt over the past three years, but he 
failed to present documentation to support his claim. While his wife’s medical problems 
and unemployment were conditions beyond his control and contributed to his financial 
problems, he failed to show that he acted responsibly under such circumstances in 
addressing the SOR-listed debts. He only documented that he resolved one SOR listed 
debt, and one other debt that may or may not be on the SOR. He has not received 
financial counseling and his financial problems are not under control. He does not have 
the resources to pay both his living expenses and his delinquent debts, despite working 
significant overtime hours. There has been no good-faith effort to address his debts and 
Applicant’s financial problems are likely to continue in the future. Applicant did not 
dispute any of the delinquencies listed on the SOR. Accordingly, the record is 
insufficient to establish mitigation under any of the foregoing provisions concerning his 
financial irresponsibility. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
8 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to list his SOR-listed debts on his e-QIP, instead denying their 
existence with his “No” response to the questions in Section 26. Despite his self-serving 
assertions that he previously disclosed the debts to his security officer, the only 
documentation that he submitted shows that the debts were reported in September 
2015, after his hearing. On balance, the evidence indicates that he willfully chose not to 
disclose his delinquent debts on the e-QIP. This behavior demonstrates questionable 
judgment and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them were established in this case. Applicant did not make 
prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification and concealment. He provided no 
information that indicates he was ill-advised in completing his e-QIP. Falsifying material 
information raises serious concerns and Applicant has done nothing to show that similar 
dishonesty is unlikely to recur. Further, he failed to take responsibility for his actions. He 
has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof for his personal 
conduct. 
 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate sufficient mitigating information in this 
case and he has failed to meet that burden. Overall, he has not demonstrated that he 
has acted responsibly with respect to his finances or by reporting them on his e-QIP. 
Applicant’s inability to resolve his financial obligations and his dishonesty on his e-QIP 
raise concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to follow rules and 
regulations necessary to protect classified information. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations or the Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
