Department Counsel submitted nine Items in support of the SOR allegations. 1
1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-03493
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 24, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on April 22, 2013. (Item 4.)  On August 7, 2014, the Department of Defense
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) concerning Applicant. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 13, 2014, and requested a
decision by an administrative judge without a hearing. (Item 3.) Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s written case (FORM) to Applicant on May 20, 2015.1
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on June 2, 2015. He was given 30 days
from receipt of the FORM to submit any additional documentation. Applicant elected not
to submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on August 5, 2015.
Even though they were not listed on his Schedule F, absent an allegation of fraud, the debts set forth in SOR2
allegations 1.b and 1.e were also discharged by operation of bankruptcy law.
2
Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 32 and married. He served honorably in the United States Navy from
2000 through December 2012. (Item 4 at Section 15.) He is employed by a defense
contractor, and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. As
described below, Applicant admitted some of the SOR allegations and denied others.
He also submitted additional evidence to support his application for a security
clearance.
The SOR allegations fall into two distinct areas. Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e,
and 1.i through 1.l concern debts Applicant is alleged to owe. These nine debts total
$33,458. He denied these allegations. The existence and amount of these debts is
supported by credit reports in the record dated April 27, 2013; and May 20, 2014. (Items
6 and 5.)   
Applicant argues that all of the above debts were included in the Schedule F of a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy he filed on March 11, 2014. That is true except for allegations 1.b
and 1.e. These debts are to the same creditor. Allegation 1.e is for a judgment entered
in 2012, and I find that it is a duplicate of 1.b. There is no evidence that this judgment
was satisfied. He subsequently received a discharge from the bankruptcy court on June
23, 2014. (Item 3 at 1, 6-11.)  2
Applicant has filed for bankruptcy three times. They will be described in
chronological order:
1.h. Applicant first filed for a Chapter 7 bankruptcy on April 18, 2003. He
received a discharge on August 9, 2003. The amount of debt he discharged is not
known. Of note in the available bankruptcy records is the fact that he reaffirmed a debt
with the creditor set forth in allegation 1.e. (Item 8.)
1.g. Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy on December 15, 2010. He stated
that he had $40,106 worth of debt, both secured and unsecured. The creditor in 1.e was
stated to have a secured claim on the estate. Applicant and his wife took the required
credit counseling. A Chapter 13 plan was confirmed by the bankruptcy court on January
3
20, 2012. Applicant subsequently voluntarily dismissed the case on September 12,
2012. There is no information as to how much money was paid to the Chapter 13
Trustee during the bankruptcy, or how many creditors were paid through the plan, if
any. (Item 9.)
Applicant states in his Answer (Item 3):
The 2010 chapter 13 bankruptcy had to be dismissed because of
my PTS [sic] from the military. Due to the loss of employment in the USN I
lost all the benefits that I was receiving. I chose to dismiss the case
because I knew that my family would need the money being used to make
payments to be able to move back into civilian life.
1.f. Applicant filed a second Chapter 7 bankruptcy on March 11, 2014. He
stated that he had no secured debt, and that he had $39,168 of unsecured debt. In
addition to the debts in the SOR, Applicant lists an additional 15 creditors, to whom he
owed a total of $19,906. Of note is the fact that two of the debts concern repossessed
automobiles. Once again, Applicant and his wife took the required credit counseling.
Applicant received a discharge from his debts on June 23, 2014. 
No information was provided concerning Applicant’s current financial situation.
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance,
the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling
sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted no character
references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or
reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
4
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant had over $39,000 in past-due debts, which were due and
owing for several years. In addition, he has filed for bankruptcy three times, and been
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code twice, the last time just last year.
The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial difficulties have been in existence for several years. Bankruptcy is
a legitimate and legal means to resolve debt. However, multiple bankruptcies can show
an inability to control finances. This mitigating condition does not have application in this
case. 
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” Applicant did not allege any conditions that might bring this
condition into operation. In fact, his e-QIP (Item 4) shows that he began work as a
civilian immediately after leaving the military. This mitigating condition does not have
application in this case. 
AG ¶ 20(d) states it can be mitigating where, “the individual has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” As stated, bankruptcy
is a legal means to resolve debt. However, in this case there is insufficient evidence that
Applicant is now financially stable after his last discharge. This mitigating condition does
not have application in this case. 
Applicant has received financial counseling, as required by the Bankruptcy Code.
However, as stated above, looking at Applicant’s entire financial situation at the present
time, I cannot find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or
is under control,” as is required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guideline F, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems for
several years, which have been resolved by bankruptcy twice. He has a long history of
not paying his debts, and no evidence was presented about his current financial
situation. Applicant’s conduct with regard to his finances was not mitigated.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent and continuing. I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also
cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); or that there is no likelihood of continuation or recurrence (AG ¶
2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation. Accordingly, the evidence supports denying his request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
