 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01086 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding personal conduct 
issues. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 22, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 16, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued him a set of interrogatories. He 
responded to the interrogatories on January 14, 2014.2 On May 1, 2014, the DOD CAF 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated November 22, 2012). 
 
2
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated January 14, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations 
made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and it detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated September 16, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated 
the Government was prepared to proceed on June 3, 2015. The case was assigned to 
me on June 5, 2015. A Notice of Hearing was issued on June 8, 2015, and I convened 
the hearing, as scheduled, on June 24, 2015.3 
 
 During the hearing, two Government exhibits (GE 1 and GE 2) and two Applicant 
exhibits (AE A and AE B) were admitted into evidence without objection.4 Applicant and 
one witness testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 1, 2015. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity, 
and he submitted an additional exhibit (AE C) that was admitted into evidence without 
objection.5 The record closed on July 16, 2015. 
                                                          
3
 The Notice of Hearing was issued 15 days before the scheduled date for the hearing, but Applicant and 
Department Counsel previously had telephone discussions regarding the time and possible location of the hearing. 
Accordingly, when specifically questioned regarding any objection to the period of actual notice, Applicant waived any 
objection he might have to the period specified in the Directive (§ E3.1.8). See Transcript (Tr.) at 11-12. 
 
4
 In his Answer to the SOR, at 1, Applicant offered the following comments: 
 
After reviewing your narrative report, I am deeply and immensely affronted by the testimony given 
and the clear embellishment of the truth. The report is very unnerving not only because it is riddled 
with untruths, but also due to the fact that these falsehoods are so basic and simple in nature that 
any rational human being can reason that the testimony is dishonest in nature. I therefore stand on 
the testimony given before. 
 
Although Applicant did not object to GE 2 at the time it was offered and admitted into evidence, he 
subsequently submitted a request that little weight should be given to some facts established in GE 2, which he 
referred to as “testimony,” because those facts were derived from business entities that were no longer in operation 
and the actual sources of the facts submitted were not identified by the investigator. When Applicant received the 
interrogatories from the DOD CAF, he was asked, in question 3 thereof, if the attached report of investigation (ROI) 
was accurate and if not, to explain how it was not correct. Applicant chose not to add any comment to the question “at 
this moment.” In question 5 thereof, he was asked if he agreed with, and adopted, the investigator’s summary as 
accurately reflecting the facts. Applicant answered “yes.” The proper time to make the objections would have been 
during the hearing when the exhibit was being offered to me and before it was admitted by me. Nevertheless, 
considering Applicant’s position as pro se, I am willing to give him some procedural latitude on the issue and revisit it. 
While it is somewhat troubling that the investigator never identified sources of the allegations of conduct and 
misconduct, or obtained documentation to support the allegations, thereby essentially denying Applicant the ability to 
confront possible bias and inaccuracies, he was able to fully address the allegations themselves. Having permitted 
some procedural latitude, I have chosen to reject Applicant’s request. Accordingly, the request is denied. 
 
5
 While Department Counsel did not object to AE C, he did suggest that the contents thereof be given little 
weight because the author of the document, while commenting on Applicant’s work performance when the author 
was Applicant’s manager, neglected to state when she was in the position and failed to address the facts and 
circumstances of Applicant’s termination from his employment. Because the author seemingly limited her comments 
to Applicant’s interactions with customers and supervisory staff, including herself, and an initial issue of 
 
3 
                                      
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to 
the evidence presented. The motion was to add or delete certain words, phrases, or 
complete sentences in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., through 1.d., as well as to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.e. 
and 1.f. in their entirety. After substantial discussion, the motion was granted without 
objection, and the amendments were made.6   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.). After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old former and prospective employee of a defense 
contractor who was hired as a consultant in November 2012. Because he did not have a 
security clearance, he was laid off about two years ago pending receipt of a security 
clearance.7 While awaiting the resolution of his security clearance issues, Applicant 
secured a position with employer Charlie as a consultant. That position lasted until May 
or June 2015, and as of the date of the hearing, he had been unemployed for about a 
month.8 He has never served with the U.S. military.9 Applicant attended high school 
overseas, but did not receive a diploma because of discrepancies regarding the credits 
he had earned. Instead, in 1999 or 2000, he received a General Educational 
Development (GED) diploma.10 Applicant obtained an associate’s degree in March 
2003, and while he continued his pursuit of a bachelor‘s degree, he has not completed 
the requirements for one.11 He was married in May 2006 and divorced in September 
2011.12 Applicant has one daughter born in 2005.13 
 
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
“insubordination” was withdrawn from the SOR, as described below, I have chosen to reject Department Counsel’s 
request. Accordingly, the request is denied. 
  
6
 Tr. at 99-107. The specifics of the motion and the amendments, while not detailed in this decision, appear 
in the transcript, as indicated. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 15; Tr. at 51-53; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 16, 2013), at 4. 
 
8
 AE A (Character Reference, dated June 10, 2015); Tr. at 53-54. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 25. 
 
10
 Tr. at 28; GE 2 (January Personal Subject Interview), supra note 7, at 3-4. 
 
11
 GE 2 (January Personal Subject Interview), supra note 7, at 3; GE 1, supra note 1, at 14-15; Tr. at 28-29. 
 
12
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 27. 
 
13
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 32. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant has an unusual employment history. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., and 1.h.): He 
served as systems support for employer Alpha from May 2003 until August 2005.14 In 
his e-QIP, Applicant stated that he left the position because he “got a better job.”15 
During his initial interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in January 2013, he acknowledged having been reprimanded on 
approximately two occasions for tardiness, but contended he received no other 
punishment other than the two written warnings, and that he left the job for a better 
opportunity and would be eligible for rehire.16 In a subsequent interview with the OPM 
investigator, upon being confronted with new information which contradicted his earlier 
description of events, Applicant acknowledged that he was “let go” by someone in 
human resources for failure to create a case number or ticket number related to an 
incoming call that he had worked on (characterized as a failure to comply with quality 
processes dictated by management). He did not previously disclose that he was let go 
because he believed he was eligible for rehire. When the investigator advised him that 
he was not eligible for rehire, Applicant stated that he was unaware of that fact.17 During 
the hearing, Applicant initially explained his “better job” response by first contending that 
he was extremely nervous at the time he completed the e-QIP, and then said he had not 
remembered it.18 He was, in fact, fired for performance reasons.19 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.b., 1.d., and 1.g.): Applicant served as systems support consultant for 
employer Bravo from August 2005 until April 2007.20 In his e-QIP, Applicant stated that 
he left the position because the “contact (sic) ended.”21 During his initial OPM interview 
in January 2013, he noted that the company was out of business and he was unable to 
provide any information regarding his employment record. He stated he “had no 
problems of any type at this employment.” He added that he left because the company’s 
contract ended, and he would be eligible for rehire. He contended he was not fired and 
that he did not quit because he was to be fired, and he “did not leave by mutual 
agreement following misconduct or performance problems, and did not leave under 
unfavorable circumstances.”22 In a subsequent interview with the OPM investigator, 
                                                          
14
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 23. It is interesting to note that Applicant listed his brother as his supervisor at the 
company because they both worked for the company and Applicant could not recall his actual supervisor’s last name. 
See GE 2 (January Personal Subject Interview), supra note 7, at 5. 
 
15
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 24; Tr. at 32. 
 
16
 GE 2 (January Personal Subject Interview), supra note 7, at 5. 
 
17
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 4, 2013), at 3-4; Tr. at 29-31. 
 
18
 Tr. at 32-33. 
 
19
 Tr. at 55-56. 
 
20
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 22.  
 
21
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 23; Tr. at 36-37. 
 
22
 GE 2 (January Personal Subject Interview), supra note 7, at 5. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
upon being confronted with new information which contradicted his earlier description of 
events, Applicant acknowledged that he was “terminated” after being placed “under the 
microscope” for various reasons including problems with a new hire and other 
performance issues. He did not previously disclose that he was terminated because he 
did not think about it..23 During the hearing, Applicant explained his “contract ended” 
response, by clarifying that he meant that his employment contract ended with his 
termination, not that the contract his employer had with the government had ended.24 
He was, in fact, fired.25 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 
 Applicant’s former supervisor at employer Alpha stated that Applicant conducted 
himself with the utmost level of professionalism in always going above and beyond the 
call of duty to assist customers and managing staff. She also noted his integrity.26 
Applicant’s lead project manager with employer Charlie characterized Applicant as 
reliable, trustworthy, very personable, and a very competent worker and great team 
player.27 A friend of ten years has known Applicant since they met at a church retreat. 
Because of their age difference, the friend is more of a mentor, counselor, or advisor. 
He characterized Applicant in glowing terms as having good integrity and judgment, 
along with reliability, integrity, and ethics.28  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”29 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”30   
 
                                                          
23
 GE 2 (March Personal Subject Interview), supra note17, at 1-3. 
 
24
 Tr. at 37-38, 47. 
 
25
 Tr. at 57-58. 
 
26
 AE C (Character Reference, dated June 20, 2015); AE B (Character Reference, dated June 20, 2015). AE 
B is the unsigned version of AE C, and is otherwise identical to AE C; Tr. at 34. 
 
27
 AE A (Character Reference, dated June 10, 2015). 
 
28
 Tr. at 90-95. 
 
29
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
30
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”31 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.32  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”33 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”34 Thus, nothing 
                                                          
31
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
32
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
33
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
34
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is: 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 “Deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts 
to an . . . investigator, security official, . . . or other official government representative “  
is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(b).  
 
It is also potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(d), if there is: 
 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 As noted above, in early 2005 and 2007, Applicant was terminated from 
employment by employers. The initial termination resulted from his failure to comply 
with quality processes dictated by management and his tardiness – personal conduct 
issues. The subsequent termination was for performance reasons – not necessarily 
personal conduct issues. On several occasions thereafter, Applicant obfuscated, 
intentionally omitted, concealed, or falsified the true facts associated with both 
terminations. The various inquiries merely sought the truth: how or why he left his 
employment with employers Alpha and Bravo. Instead of responding truthfully, 
completely, and accurately, Applicant offered fanciful renditions of false scenarios. The 
truthful answer should have been “terminated,” but Applicant chose something different: 
“getting a better job” or “the contract ended.” Both responses were false. Repeated 
inquiries finally obtained more truthful responses, still tainted by false comments. The 
evidence reveals unreliable behavior and a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. AG 
¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), and 16(d) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of those mitigating conditions apply. 
His conduct shows a lack of honesty and integrity. It is also continuous, recent, and 
serious. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.35       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. A former 
supervisor at employer Alpha and a former lead project manager at employer Charlie, as 
                                                          
35
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
well as a friend/mentor, refer to Applicant in glowing terms with special emphasis on his 
professionalism, reliability, and judgment. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant was terminated by two different employers. Yet, when he completed his e-
QIP, was interviewed by an OPM investigator, completed answers to interrogatories, 
when he answered the SOR, and when he testified during the hearing, Applicant 
preferred to use word-games to conceal the truth of his ended employment 
relationships. He denied the responses were deliberate or an attempt to falsify the 
material facts. Instead, he attributed his actions to nervousness or his understanding 
that he was eligible for rehire. Applicant’s actions were not isolated and his efforts to 
conceal the truth were repeated over several occasions and over several years. As 
such, his behavior was not aberrant. Instead, it became the standard of his 
unacceptable behavior. Applicant is an intelligent, talented, and experienced individual, 
but his explanations are unreasonable and not credible. Accordingly, I have concluded 
that he deliberately falsified his responses in an attempt to conceal the truth about his 
personal  conduct. Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. See 
AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Withdrawn  
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
