 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              1 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------    )  ISCR Case No. 14-06399 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 26 charged-off, collection or 
delinquent accounts totaling $31,181. She failed to provide sufficient information about 
her finances and her progress in resolving her SOR debts. From May 2008 through 
March 2014 on five occasions, she was either terminated from employment or quit her 
employment after being told she would be fired; however, there is insufficient 
information about the circumstances of the terminations, and personal conduct security 
concerns are refuted. Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
Access to classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On May 14, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 3) On January 20, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,  
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF made a preliminary decision to 
deny or revoke Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Specifically, the 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              2 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations and personal 
conduct guidelines.  
 
On March 5, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and on March 11, 2015, she 
waived her right to a hearing. On June 29, 2015, Department Counsel completed the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM). On July 21, 2015, Applicant received the FORM. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM.1 On November 9, 2015, the case was assigned 
to me. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits. (Items 1-5)  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted SOR the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c 
through 1.m, 1.t through 1.z, and 2.a through 2.e. She denied the remaining SOR 
allegations, and she provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old security employee of a defense contractor, who has 
been employed by a defense contractor since March of 2014.3 In 2004, she graduated 
from high school, and she has some college credits from a community college. She has 
never served in the military. She has never married, and she does not have any 
children. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant described the source of her financial problems as illness, brief breaks 
in employment, and unemployment. (SOR response; SF 86) The information about 
special circumstances adversely affecting her finances was not specific about the 
impact on her finances, such as the costs of medical care, the periods of unemployment 
and scope or degree of underemployment, etc.    
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, SF 86 
and SOR response. Her 26 charged-off, collection or delinquent SOR accounts totaling 
$31,181 are described as follows: 21 medical collection accounts totaling $21,200 in ¶ 
1.a for $81, ¶ 1.b for $164, ¶ 1.c for $427, ¶ 1.d for $250, ¶ 1.e for $170, ¶ 1.f for $220, 
¶ 1.g for $200, ¶ 1.h for $130, ¶ 1.i for $50, ¶ 1.j for $25, ¶ 1.k for $25, ¶ 1.l for $35, ¶ 
1.o for $595, ¶ 1.p for $467, ¶ 1.q for $470, ¶ 1.r for $717, ¶ 1.s for $270, ¶ 1.t for $574, 
¶ 1.u for $287, and ¶ 1.v for $17,417, and ¶ 1.z for $268; a charged-off credit union debt 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated July 8, 2015, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated July 21, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 
days after her receipt to submit information.   
 
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph and the next three 
paragraphs is Applicant’s May 14, 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) 
(SF 86). (Item 2) 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              3 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
in ¶ 1.m for $8,027; a telecommunications collection account in ¶ 1.n for $127; and 
three local government collection debts in ¶ 1.w for $55, ¶ 1.x for $65, and ¶ 1.y for $65.       
 
Applicant said she was in the hospital for treatment for a chronic disease, and 
she did not have medical insurance. (SOR response) Her illness resulted in the 
following medical collection debts: ¶ 1.c ($427); ¶ 1.d ($250); ¶ 1.e ($170); ¶ 1.f ($220); 
¶ 1.g ($200); ¶ 1.h ($130); ¶ 1.t ($574); ¶ 1.u ($287); and ¶ 1.v ($17,417). (SOR 
response) On March 5, 2015, she said she called an agent to set up bi-weekly 
payments from her checking account. (SOR response) Checking account statements 
showing payments were not provided. 
 
Applicant said she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($50) on March 20, 2015. She said 
she paid the debts in SOR ¶ 1.j ($25), ¶ 1.k ($25), and ¶ 1.l ($35) on unspecified dates.  
 
 On February 25, 2015, the credit union creditor in SOR ¶ 1.m ($8,027) wrote that 
Applicant owed $3,918 to the credit union. (SOR response) In February 2015, she made 
a $25 payment, which the creditor accepted. (SOR response) 
 
 Applicant denied responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($127). (SOR response) 
She said the debt was not delinquent, and she would seek correction of her credit report 
to accurately reflect the status of this account. (SOR response)  
 
 Applicant denied responsibility for the medical-collection debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
($164), 1.o ($595), 1.p ($467), and 1.q ($470) because she was unaware of the debt or 
did not recognize the name of the collection agent seeking collection of the debt. (SOR 
response) For the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.o, she said she would dispute these two 
debts. (SOR response) For the other two debts, she said she will be “looking into this.” 
(SOR response)   
 
Applicant said she paid the three debts owed to a local government creditor for 
the debts in SOR ¶ 1.w for $55, ¶ 1.x for $65, and ¶ 1.y for $65. (SOR response) On 
December 27, 2013, she paid a ticket for $250; on October 27, 2010, she paid a ticket 
for $55; and on December 9, 2010, she paid a ticket for an unspecified amount. (SOR 
response)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On Applicant’s May 14, 2014 SF 86, she disclosed that on five occasions she 
was terminated from her employment or quit after being informed her employer intended 
to terminate her. Those five instances are described as follows: 
 
 In May 2008, she was terminated from her employment for abandoning her 
security post or for talking to other agency police. (SOR ¶ 2.e; Item 3) Applicant denied 
that she abandoned her post.  
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              4 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
 In May 2011, Applicant quit after being told that she would be fired because she 
let her armed or security license expire. (SOR ¶ 2.d; Item 3) Applicant said she did not 
wish to continue the employment.    
 
 In May 2012, Applicant quit after being told that she would be fired. (SOR ¶ 2.c) 
Applicant said she quit because her employer was being unfair. Her employer alleged 
that she abandoned her post, moved her vehicle, and wore “loud pink nail polish.” (Item 
3) 
  
 In January 2013, Applicant was fired from her employment. (SOR ¶ 2.b) She said 
she was rushing to start work and signed in with an incorrect time. She also said she 
was fired for “poor attendance.” (Item 3) 
 
 In March 2014, Applicant was fired from her employment. (SOR ¶ 2.a) She said 
she was terminated because of her time and attendance. Specifically, she “also left site 
early due to me being ill, and site manager was notified the next morning about it.” (Item 
3)   
 
Applicant’s FORM noted the absence of corroborating documentation and 
detailed explanations of the causes for her financial problems and other mitigating 
information and explained that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3) As 
indicated previously, Applicant did not respond to the FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              5 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              6 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in her credit reports, SF 86 and SOR response. Her records document 
credit-report evidence of 26 charged-off, collection or delinquent SOR accounts totaling 
$31,181. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
  
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              7 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of her SOR debts; however, she presented 
some important mitigating information. The following circumstances beyond Applicant’s 
control adversely affected her finances: Applicant had brief periods of unemployment 
after being fired; she had periods of being underemployed; and she had medical 
problems. She did not provide details about the degree of impact of these 
circumstances beyond her control. She did not describe financial counseling, and she 
did not provide her budget.    
 
Applicant is credited with paying the following seven SOR debts: ¶ 1.i ($50); ¶ 1.j 
($25); ¶ 1.k ($25); ¶ 1.l ($35); ¶ 1.w ($55); ¶ 1.x ($65); and ¶ 1.y ($65); and with having 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($8,027) reduced to $3,918 and being in a payment plan. She is 
also credited with resolving the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($127) because she said the debt 
was not delinquent. 
 
Applicant did not provide any of the following documentation relating to the other 
SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies 
of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to 
the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from any creditors to establish maintenance of 
contact with creditors;5 (3) credible debt disputes indicating she did not believe she was 
responsible for the debts and why she held such a belief; (4) attempts to negotiate 
payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was 
                                            
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              8 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution of her 
debts. 
 
On March 5, 2012, Applicant denied several debts and said she was going to 
dispute her responsibility for them. She failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) 
because she did not provide a copy of her letter to the creditor and credit reporting 
companies or other documents showing she disputed her responsibility for the debts. 
   
Applicant’s failure to provide more detailed information and corroborating 
documentation shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against 
approval of her security clearance. There is insufficient evidence about why she was 
unable to make greater progress resolving most of her SOR debts. There is insufficient 
assurance that her financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, she failed to establish that financial 
consideration security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              9 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources; and 
  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. . . . 
  
On Applicant’s May 14, 2014 SF 86, she disclosed that on five occasions she 
was terminated from her employment or quit after being informed that her employer 
intended to terminate her. Applicant denied that she left her post without permission in 
2008, and she was unclear about whether she admitted leaving her post without 
permission in 2012. In 2011, the circumstances of her security or firearm license 
expiration are not detailed. She said in 2013, she was terminated for poor attendance; 
however, the record does not establish whether she actually missed work, and if she did 
miss work, how often she missed work, or why she missed work. There is no evidence 
from any employer contradicting her accounts for why she left her employment. There is 
no summary of Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview 
(PSI) or witness interviews in the record. The record does not contain interviews of her 
former coworkers or supervisors, time-card evidence, records of employer counseling or 
reprimands. The Government has the initial burden of establishing why Applicant was 
terminated from employment and here, Applicant has essentially admitted her 
terminations from employment; however, she denied culpability for her terminations 
from employment. The disqualifying conditions alleged in the SOR under the personal 
conduct guideline are refuted.   
 
Additionally, AG ¶ 17(e) provides one condition that mitigates security concerns 
in this case stating, “(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” Disclosure of her negative history 
of employment and documentation in security files has eliminated Appellant’s 
“vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” Personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              10 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 30-year-old security employee of a defense contractor, who has been employed by 
her current defense contractor since March of 2014. She is a high school graduate, and 
she has some college credits from a community college. Her financial problems are 
initially attributed to her medical problems, unemployment, and underemployment. 
Applicant did not provide any employer evaluations or character statements. There is no 
evidence of abuse of alcohol or use of illegal drugs. She disclosed her financial 
problems and employment history of terminations on her May 14, 2014 SF 86.  
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Her SOR alleges 
26 charged-off, collection or delinquent accounts totaling $31,181. I have credited her 
with mitigating nine SOR debts, leaving her with 17 unresolved debts totaling $22,707. 
She did not provide any evidence of payments to those remaining creditors, payment 
plans, or her communications to those creditors. She did not provide documentation 
showing her attempts to resolve those 17 debts in good faith. Her failure to provide 
more corroborating documentation shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment 
and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about her 
inability to pay her debts, her financial history, and her documented financial progress is 
necessary to fully mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of her past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with her 
obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that personal conduct concerns are refuted; however, financial 
consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not clearly consistent with the 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              11 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i through 1.n:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.o through 1.v:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.w through 1.y:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.z:    Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
