 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06051 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has more than 
$42,000 in delinquent collection and charged-off accounts. He secured the services of a 
credit correction firm, but has made no payments on his delinquent obligations. 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns; however, he has failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On February 9, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department 
of Defense (DoD) Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. DoD adjudicators 
could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance. On March 6, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. On April 15, 2015, I was assigned the case. On April 21, 2015, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
hearing convened on May 4, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 5 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant 
to submit additional information. Applicant’s Exhibits A and B were received and 
admitted without objection. On May 12, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied two medical collection debts (SOR 
1.a, $477 and SOR 1.g, $151) and admitted the remaining debts with explanations. In 
his SOR answer, he stated he did not recall the majority of the SOR delinquent 
accounts. He admitted the 2005 Extreme Driving Under the Influence (DUI) conviction 
and five-day suspension from work. He denied resigning from his job after being 
disciplined for fraternization. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old security supervisor who has worked for a defense 
contractor since December 2013. (Ex. 1, Tr. 23) His annual salary is $57,000 and his 
wife recently obtained a position as a nanny with a $36,000 annual salary, making the 
household’s gross annual income $93,000. (Tr. 23) 
 
From April 1988 through April 1992, Applicant honorably served in the U.S. 
Marine Corps separating as a corporal (E-4). (Ex. 1, Tr. 24) After separating from the 
Marine Corps, he was unemployed for six months to a year. (Tr. 25) From August 1995 
to February 2009, he was employed as a border patrol agent. (Ex.2, Tr. 26) After he left 
his job as a border patrol agent, he was unemployed for a period of time. Between July 
2005 and December 2013, when he obtained his current job, he was unemployed 21 
months. (Ex. 2) He was unemployed October 2009 through January 2012, October 
2012 through February 2013, and October 2013 through December 2013.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems started in 2008, when his job transfer resulted in 
him maintaining a mortgage at his previous location and renting at the new location. The 
transfer came with a guaranteed home buy-out from the Government. However, he 
owed $222,000 on his home and the Government offered to pay $202,000. (Tr. 28) The 
difference between the amounts was a $21,919 home equity loan (SOR 1.c). He 
attempted, but was unsuccessful, at obtaining a home loan modification. The home 
went to foreclosure. (Tr. 27) The delinquent account appears on Applicant’s January 
2015 credit report. (Ex. 5)  
 
3 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his 2005 extreme DUI with a blood alcohol content 
(BAC) of .15 or more and indicated it was a “stupid act.” (SOR Answer, Ex. 3) He 
indicated he was an alcoholic. (Tr. 47) August 2009 was the last time he drank alcohol. 
(SOR Answer, Tr. 18)  
 
On Applicant’s June 2009, Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he indicated there was pending administrative discipline for 
violation of the fraternization policy. He denied resigning from his job after being 
disciplined for violation of the policy. In February 2009, Applicant was informed of a 
fraternization violation when he, as an instructor, was drinking with newly hired 
employees. He was never disciplined for this violation. (Tr. 49)  
 
The November 2009 Notification of Personnel Action indicated he resigned for 
“Personal Reasons.” (SOR Answer) His job transfer took him from one border location 
to an even more remote border location. The fraternization problem arose in February 
2009, and he resigned eight months later, in October 2009. (Tr. 51) At the hearing, he 
stated he received no disciplinary action or threat of disciplinary action for the 
fraternization incident.  
 
 On Applicant’s June 2009 e-QIP, he indicated he had entered into an agreement 
with a consumer credit counseling service (CCCS) related to a department store 
account. (Ex. 1, Tr. 30) He made monthly payments to the CCCS for three years. (Tr. 
30) He made his monthly payments to the CCCS, and the CCCS then made payments 
to his creditors. (Tr. 30)  
 
In Applicant’s April 2014 e-QIP, he listed 25 delinquent accounts, which included 
112 of the 12 SOR delinquent accounts. He stated his financial problems commenced in 
2009 following his resignation from his job. (Tr. 33) He resigned without having another 
job lined up. (Tr. 43) At that time, neither he nor his wife were working. (Tr. 33) He 
remained out of work from October 2009 through January 2012. On his most recent e-
QIP, he indicated he had obtained the credit repair service to assist him with his credit 
issues. (Ex. 2)  
 
In April 2014, Applicant employed a firm to assist him in improving his finances. 
He paid the firm $99.95 monthly for their services. Payments were made monthly from 
April 2014 through April 13, 2015. (Ex. A, Tr. 32) He provided documents showing he 
had made 13 payments. (Ex. A, B) At the hearing, Applicant stated he was unsure what 
the credit repair service did or how they did their job. (Tr. 31) He did not know if the 
credit correction firm actually made payments to his creditors. (Tr. 41) 
 
The credit correction firm sends letters to creditors challenging any negative 
entry on an individual’s credit report. Challenge letters are sent even on accounts an 
individual acknowledges are their valid debts. The firm sent out letters on Applicant’s 
                                                          
2 The $1,158 jewelry debt (SOR 1.l) may be the same $1,158 amount he listed on his e-QIP as owed to a 
different creditor. 
 
4 
behalf on 36 occasions challenging even the delinquent obligations he acknowledged 
were his debts in his SOR answer. As a result of the letters, Experian removed eight 
entries from his credit report, TransUnion removed eight entries, and Equifax removed 
six entries. The only debt removed from all three credit reporting agencies was for a 
non-SOR debt. Four of the SOR delinquent obligations (SOR 1.a, $455; SOR 1.b, 
$1,165; SOR 1.i, $162; and, SOR 1.l, $1,158), totaling $2,530 were removed by two of 
the credit reporting agencies. Four of the SOR delinquent obligations (SOR 1.d, $1,893; 
SOR 1.e, $7,551; SOR 1.f, $338; and, SOR 1.g, $151), totaling $9,933 were removed 
by one of the three credit reporting agencies.  
 
Applicant’s May 2014 credit report listed a foreclosure, three accounts being paid 
late, 23 collection accounts, and 30 accounts being or having been “paid as agreed.” 
(Ex. 4) None of the delinquent accounts were contested on the credit report. On his 
January 2015 credit report, seven delinquent accounts are listed as disputed by the 
consumer. Six accounts are listed as transferred or sold and four are listed as paid or 
having a zero balance. Six accounts totaling more than $27,000 appear as valid 
collection accounts even though five of them were listed as disputed by the consumer. 
(Ex. 5)  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant stated he did not believe he should be liable for the 
$1,165 telephone service debt (SOR 1.b) because, following his job transfer, the 
telephone service provider did not provide coverage for the new area. (Tr. 35) When he 
contacted the company, they cancelled his service contract due to the inability to 
receive service at his new location. (Tr. 35) He asserts he paid the $338 utility bill (SOR 
1.f) when he transferred to his new location in 2009. (Tr. 36) However, after 14 letters 
challenging this debt, the account was removed from only one of the three credit 
reporting agencies. (Ex. B) He said he had paid the $162 furniture bill (SOR 1.i). (Tr. 36) 
The letters challenging this $162 debt resulted in it being removed from two of the three 
credit reporting agencies. The record was held open to allow for documentation that he 
had paid these two debts. No documents showing payment were received. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
6 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent accounts including seven collection accounts and five 
charged-off accounts including a mortgage of approximately $22,000. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were contributed to by periods of unemployment 
and by an equity home loan not covered by a government buy out when he was 
transferred from one border location to another. Between July 2005 and December 
2013, when he obtained his current job, he was unemployed 21 months. In April 2014, 
 
7 
he sought the assistance of a credit correction firm. He provided documentation 
showing he made 13 payments of $100 each. Four SOR delinquent accounts were 
removed from two of the three credit reporting agencies, and four other SOR accounts 
were removed from one the credit reporting agencies as a result of the letters sent by 
the debt correction firm. However, none of the delinquent SOR obligations were 
removed by all three of credit reporting agencies. Even though these SOR obligations 
have been removed from some of his credit bureau reports, however, he admitted 
owing all of the SOR delinquent account in his SOR answer. 
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been 
employed with his current employer since December 2012. In February 2015, he was 
made aware of the Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. He has made no 
payments on his delinquent obligations. By failing to document the payment of 
delinquent debts he has failed to act responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s household income has recently increased to approximately $93,000, 
with his wife’s recently obtained job. Since April 2014, he has only paid $1,300 to a 
credit correction firm. With this small amount paid, he has failed to act responsibly or 
aggressively in addressing his debts. He provided no evidence he has received credit or 
financial counseling. Nor has he demonstrated that his financial problems are under 
control or that he has a plan to bring them under control. The mitigating conditions listed 
in AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply 
because Applicant admitted the SOR delinquent obligations. 
 
Although Applicant has paid none of the delinquent SOR obligations, the 
telephone account listed in SOR 1.b ($1,265) does not appear to be a valid obligation. 
He had a cell phone account when his job transferred him to a location not covered by 
the cell phone provider. This cell phone account should have ended when the transfer 
occurred since the cell phone company could no longer provide service. This debt is 
found in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
Personal conduct is a security concern when conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Personal conduct is always a 
security concern because it asks whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence 
the person can be trusted to properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  
 
In 2005, Applicant was convicted of Extreme Driving Under the Influence. The 
event occurred ten years ago. He no longer drinks alcohol. This event is sufficiently 
remote in time as to no longer be of security concern. In 2009, Applicant left his job for 
personal reasons. There is no indication that he left due to a fraternization incident that 
had occurred nine months before he resigned. His resignation does not involve conduct 
 
8 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. His resignation fails to raise a security concern. The personal 
conduct security concern is resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served honorably in the 
U.S. Marine Corps. Applicant’s 2005 DUI and 2009 resignation are not of security 
concern. He has experienced periods of unemployment between July 2005 and 
December 2013. Although Applicant has made 13 payments of $100 each to a credit 
correction firm, no payments were made on any of the delinquent SOR obligations. 
These payments, when compared to his income, fail to show he aggressively addressed 
his delinquent obligations.  
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He did not provide proof of any payments 
to his SOR creditors. He has not provided documentation showing sufficient progress 
on his SOR debts. His documented steps are simply inadequate to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
 
9 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
  
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
