1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 14-04820
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on May 20, 2014. The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on
December 24, 2014, detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006.
 
Item 3.1
Item 3.2
2
Applicant received the SOR, and she submitted a notarized, written response to
the SOR allegations dated January 13, 2015. She requested a decision on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on August 6, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on August
11, 2015. She had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She submitted a response dated
September 2, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this
case to me on October 8, 2015. The Government submitted five exhibits, which have
been marked as Items 1-5 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to the
SOR has been marked as Item 2, and the SOR has been marked as Item 1. Her written
response to the FORM is admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-E.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the
SOR. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. She also provided
additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance. After
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 35 years, works as a case manager for a DOD contractor. She
began her current employment in May 2014. Applicant began working in the mortgage
industry in August 2002. She worked for her first employer until November 2008, when
she was laid off due to a decline in the business. She worked in human resources for a
health care company from November 2008 until April 2012, when she resigned due to
health issues with her daughter, which resulted in Applicant’s absence from work. She
was unemployed from April 2012 until September 2012, when she accepted another
mortgage processor position with a bank. This position ended one year later, when the
bank closed the location where she worked. She was again unemployed from October
2013 until April 2014. She then worked one month part time as an administrative
assistant, and she worked one week at a temporary position before accepting her
current position.1
Applicant is single, and she has a 17-year-old daughter. Applicant attended
college on two separate occasions for a total of one year. She has not received a
degree or certificate in any particular field.2
Applicant earned a reasonable income until she lost her job in November 2008.
Before her employer laid her off, her employer reduced her monthly income because
company business continued to declined. Although she immediately found a new
Item 2; Item 3; AE A.3
Item 4.4
Item 4; AE A; AE E.5
Item 4.6
AE C; AE D.7
3
position, her job in the health care industry paid about one-half of the income she
earned in the mortgage industry. She has not yet earned income as high as she earned
between 2002 and 2008. Between April 2012 and May 2014, Applicant experienced
periods of unemployment, suffered a job loss, and worked part-time or temporary jobs.
She exhausted her savings and moved into her parents’ home to reduce her living
expenses. She recently moved to her own residence, which is close to her job.  3
The SOR identified 11 debts listed on the credit report dated June 6, 2014. The
debts included two judgments totaling $4,251, one education loan for $6,239, two cable
debts toaling $162, and six other debts totaling $15,698. The SOR debts total $26,350.
This credit report also reflects that debts in SOR allegations 1.d and 1.h-1.k occurred
four to seven years ago, making most of them most likely uncollectible under state
statute of limitation laws. The same credit report shows a paid collection for $271.4
Applicant did not provide copies of her earnings statement to show her current
income level nor did she explain the actual difference in her current income and her
earlier income in the mortgage industry. She did not provide a budget, showing her
current monthly expenses.
SOR allegation 1.a relates to a $3,046 judgment. Applicant provided a copy of
the court documents, showing a total judgment of $3,563, and an agreement to pay $50
a week on this debt beginning in October 2009. Applicant states that she paid this debt,
but she failed to provide a letter from the creditor indicating the debt was paid or a copy
of the line of satisfaction filed with the court.5
The June 2014 credit report reflects that the $1,205 judgment identified in SOR
allegation 1.b has been satisfied.6
The $6,239 debt in SOR allegation 1.f relates to an education loan. Applicant
provided documentation indicating that she successfully rehabilitated this loan. The loan
is deferred because she lacks the funds to make a payment. Her current deferred
payment and her future payments are income based. Her ability to pay will be
reassessed around April 2016. Her first payment is not scheduled to begin until May
2016. The amount of her payment, if any, will be determined after her income and
expenses are reviewed. This debt is addressed.7
Item 4; AE A; AE B.8
AE A.9
4
The June 2014 credit report reflects that Applicant disputed the $603 debt in
SOR allegation 1.i. The result of her dispute is unknown. The credit report also indicates
that the original creditor identified in SOR allegation 1.j ($1,314) sold the debt and
closed its account. Applicant provided documentation showing that the new creditor
obtained a judgment against her and garnished her wages. The debt was fully paid and
released in March 2015.8
The remaining SOR debts are unpaid. Applicant advised in her response that she
contacted her creditors when she lost her job in 2008 to advise of the change in her
financial situation and to work out payment plans. Some creditors worked out payment
plans with her, and she resolved the debt. These debts are not included in the SOR.
Other creditors demanded payments that she could not make. She continues to work
with her creditors to pay her debts as her funds become available. She contacted the
creditor in SOR allegation 1.e. The creditor advised that she did not owe a debt nor had
it referred any account in her name to collection. She continues to have an account with
this creditor.9
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
5
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems when she lost her job in 2008
and obtained work at half her salary. Most of the debts have not been resolved. These
two disqualifying conditions apply.
6
The financial considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.
Applicant lost her job in late 2008. Although she found other work, she earned a
significantly lower salary. She left her job in 2012 because her daughter’s health
required Applicant’s attention and caused Applicant to miss time from work. She lost a
second job in 2013 and remained unemployed for six months. All of these incidents
leading to her financial issues are factors beyond her control. She contacted her
creditors and tried to develope manageable payment plans, but she was unsuccessful
with several creditors and successful with others. She paid two debts or judgments
through a wage garnishment. In 2014, she worked out an agreement to rehabilitate her
student loans and complied with the terms of the agreement. Her student loans are
being repaid based on her income. At this time, she is not required to make a monthly
payment on her student loans. Her ability to repay will be evaluated once a year.
Applicant agreed to a payment plan in 2009 to resolve the $3,500 judgment, but she
has not provided proof that she complied with the terms of the plan. Because she
complied with other payment agreements, her statement that she paid this debt is
credible. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) partially apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
In assessing whether an applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F, the Appeal Board provided10
the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of
“‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007).
However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off
each and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd.
Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has “. . . established
a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.”
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can reasonably
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is
credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a
determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding
debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for
the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.
In a recent decision, the DOHA Appeal Board stated that security clearance decisions are not controlled or11
lim ited by statutes of limitation. A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an
applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. Accordingly even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable under state law, the federal
government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct  in incurring
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern.10
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did
not provide a copy of her recent leave and earnings statements or a budget, making it
difficult to assess her current monthly finances; however, her student loan
documentation indicates that she has limited income. She provided documentation
showing that she has worked either on her own or through garnishment actions to
resolve some of her debts. Because of her lost income, she has worked at resolving her
debts one or two at a time. Some creditors have refused to work with her. She disputed
one debt, and the creditor for the $60 debt has no record of a debt. Three debts totaling
$5,888 are over six years old and likely barred from collection under state law.  11
and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner. ISCR Case No. 14-03991 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 17, 2015) 
8
Applicant’s ability to pay all her debts at one time has been hampered by her loss
of income through salary reduction and periodic unemployment. After she exhausted
her savings, she moved into her parents’ home in an effort to reduce her monthly
expenses. She did not ignore her debts; rather, she simply lacked the resources
necessary to pay her debts. Since 2008, she has worked with cooperative creditors one
at a time, and she plans to continue her debt payment pattern. Of course, the issue is
not simply whether all her debts are paid; it is whether her financial circumstances raise
concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. While some debts remain
unpaid, they are insufficient to raise trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment concerns.
(See AG & 2(a)(1).) 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
