 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              1 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06563 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges one state tax debt for about 
$21,000, a telecommunications debt for $160, and a medical debt for $56. Appellant 
paid the debts for $21,000 and $56. She successfully disputed the $160 debt. All three 
SOR debts are resolved. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. Access to 
classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On July 13, 2012, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Item 2) On March 4, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF made a preliminary decision to 
deny or revoke Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On March 19, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and she waived her right 
to a hearing. (Item 2) On July 31, 2015, Department Counsel completed the File of 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              2 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
Relevant Material (FORM). On September 28, 2015, Applicant received the FORM. 
Applicant provided an undated response to the FORM. On October 26, 2015, 
Department Counsel stated she had no objection to the Applicant’s FORM response. 
On November 9, 2015, the case was assigned to me. The Government’s case consisted 
of six exhibits. (Items 1-6)  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted responsibility for the $56 medical 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.b and the $21,000 state tax debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. She denied 
responsibility for the $160 telecommunications debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. She also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is 51 years old, and she has been employed by a security firm since 
2002. She is seeking a security clearance. In 1982, she received a high school diploma, 
and she did not disclose any college attendance or military service. She has never 
married, and she has four children, who were born in 1981, 1984, 1989, and 1991. 
There is no evidence of any security violations, alcohol abuse, use of illegal drugs, or 
criminal conduct. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 2012 and 2015 credit 
reports, SF 86, August 28, 2012 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI), SOR response, and FORM response. Applicant disputed her 
responsibility for the $160 telecommunications debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant denied that 
she ever had an account with the creditor. She contacted the creditor, and the creditor 
was unable to locate the account.  
 
 On March 18, 2015, Applicant paid the $56 medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. She 
explained that she thought her medical insurance was going to pay the debt. 
 
Applicant acknowledged responsibility for the $21,000 state tax debt in SOR ¶ 
1.c. Applicant said she timely filed her state tax returns. The cause of her state tax debt 
for $21,000 was an error she made on her tax returns that was discovered through an 
audit. She did not explain further about the error she made, which tax years were 
involved, etc. The state obtained a judgment against Applicant in May 2013, and she 
satisfied the judgment in April 2015. (FORM response) The state formally filed a court 
document indicating the debt was satisfied in May 2015.  
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this 
section is her August 28, 2012 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), 
SOR response, and her July 13, 2012 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) 
(SF 86). (Items 2-3, 6) 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              3 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
 The FORM notes that Applicant’s August 28, 2012 OPM PSI describes several 
non-SOR delinquent accounts and two judgments. (Item 6) She said she was behind on 
her adjustable rate mortgage, and was seeking renegotiation of her mortgage. (Item 6) 
Applicant’s February 26, 2015 credit report shows the two judgments cited in the 2012 
OPM PSI were satisfied in 2014, and she has no currently past due accounts. (Item 5) 
During her 2012 OPM PSI, she said she did not have any financial counseling.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              4 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required . . . .” Applicant’s history of 
delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, SF 86, OPM PSI, SOR response, 
and FORM response. Applicant’s SOR alleges, and the evidence establishes Applicant 
has a 2013 state tax judgment for $21,000, indicating she did not pay taxes “as 
required,” and two other debts totaling less than $300. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) requiring additional inquiry 
about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              5 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
   
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              6 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, and 
she had substantially paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c by the time the SOR was issued.  
  
 Applicant did not reveal any conditions largely beyond her control or any financial 
counseling. Applicant’s current credit report shows no past due or currently negative 
accounts. Her negative financial situation “occurred under such circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [Applicant’s] current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Her financial problem is under control.  
 
 Applicant successfully disputed the telecommunications debt for $160 in SOR ¶ 
1.a. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a.       
  
In sum, Applicant has resolved all three of the SOR debts and the negative 
accounts specified in the OPM PSI. Her actions show sufficient effort, good judgment, 
trustworthiness, and reliability to warrant mitigation of financial considerations concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
The rationale for approving Applicant’s clearance is more substantial than the 
reasons for denying her clearance. Applicant is a 51-year-old security employee, who is 
seeking a security clearance. She has been employed by the same government 
contractor since 2002. There is no evidence of any security or violations, alcohol abuse, 
use of illegal drugs, or criminal conduct. 
 
 Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, when she resolved all of 
her debts. Her February 26, 2015 credit report indicates she has no currently delinquent 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              7 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
debts. She understands that she needs to pay her debts, and the conduct required to 
retain her security clearance.        
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. Her efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident she will maintain her financial 
responsibility.3 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
                                            
3The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. 
The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security 
significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security 
significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise made in a 
security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may 
support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to grant Applicant’s security 
clearance is conditional. 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY                                              8 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies                                             
 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
