 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06669 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 12 delinquent, collection, or 
charged-off accounts and two judgments totaling $27,228. He has not made any 
payments to SOR creditors since December 2012. Four debts are mitigated because he 
disputed two debts, and two debts are duplications. He failed to provide sufficient 
documentation of his progress in resolving his financial problems. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. Applicant submitted his May 24, 2012 SF 86 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security 
clearance application (SF 86) knowing that it did not include accurate information about 
his financial problems. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2012, Applicant submitted an SF 86. (GE 1) On June 15, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). (HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
access to classified information and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted or denied. (HE 2) 
 
On July 16, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. (HE 
3) On August 20, 2015, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On September 
14, 2015, Applicant’s case was assigned to me. On September 18, 2015, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing setting the hearing 
for October 1, 2015. Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, 
and location of his hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 14-15) Department Counsel offered six 
exhibits into evidence, and Application offered two exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 18-21, 66-
69, Government Exhibit (GE) 1-6; Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A; AE B) There were no 
objections and all exhibits were admitted into evidence. (Tr. 18-21, 69; GE 1-6; AE A; 
AE B) On October 9, 2015, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h and 1.j 
through 1.l.2 He said the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d were duplications of each other. 
He denied the other SOR allegations, and he provided extenuating and mitigating 
information as part of his SOR response. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old financial-management analyst. (Tr. 6) He served in the 
Ivory Coast military for two years from 1973 to 1975. (Tr. 8; GE 1) In 1987, he 
graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) In 1983, he received a bachelor’s degree, and in 
1987, he received a law degree in a foreign country. (Tr. 7) In 1994, he married, and his 
first spouse passed away. (Tr. 8)3 In 2008, he married, and in 2011, he divorced. (Tr. 8; 
GE 1) He does not have any children. (Tr. 9) He has never served in the U.S. military. 
(GE 1) There is no evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal 
drugs. (GE 1; GE 6) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In the previous ten years, Applicant listed one period of unemployment on his SF 
86, and that was from October 2008 to October 2009. (Tr. 30; GE 1) From October 
2009 to May 2012, Applicant was employed by a federal contractor as a financial 
                                            
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (HE 3)   
 
3Applicant’s May 24, 2012 SF 86 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) 
version of a security clearance application (SF 86) did not mention his marriage in 1992. (GE 1) He was 
not asked and did not provide the year his spouse passed away. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
analyst. (Tr. 60) He said he was actually only employed part-time during this period, and 
he began to have financial problems in 2009. (Tr. 29-31, 60) He used credit cards to 
pay his day-to-day living expenses. (Tr. 32) In December 2012, Applicant paid a 
company $99 to dispute negative entries on his credit reports. (Tr. 26-27, 35; AE A) He 
did not continue the payments because of lack of funds. (Tr. 27, 35) He was employed 
from May 2010 until March 2013. (Tr. 32, 37)  
 
Applicant has been employed in retail since September 2014, and he has been 
earning about $600 or $700 monthly for take-home pay. (Tr. 38, 40) He has received 
offers of employment for about $70,000 in financial management, provided he can 
obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 39) His 2004 Mercedes is paid off. (Tr. 40) He pays 
$138 monthly to store his furniture. (Tr. 41) Applicant only has one active credit card; 
and he pays $25 monthly on this credit card, which has a balance of $400. (Tr. 41-42, 
59) He did not provide additional details about his expenses.    
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) Personal Subject Interview (PSI), credit reports, SOR response, 
and hearing record. His SOR alleges 12 delinquent, collection, or charged-off accounts 
and two judgments totaling $27,228. Applicant believes the accounts in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($1,276) and ¶ 1.d ($1,216) are duplications of each other. (Tr. 44; SOR response) The 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($567) is being collected by the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.g ($567). (Tr. 45) 
He disputed his responsibility for the telecommunications debts in SOR ¶ 1.i ($70) and ¶ 
1.m ($145), and he informed the creditors that he was not responsible for these debts. 
(Tr. 46-47) He admitted responsibility for the other SOR debts. (SOR response) 
 
Applicant said he started a payment plan with the bank creditors in SOR ¶ 1.a 
($7,130) and in SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,849); however, they “did not work out” because he is 
under employed or unemployed and lacked the income to make payments. (Tr. 57-58) 
The “payment plans” were discussions over the telephone, and they were not specific 
about how much he would pay or when payments would start. (Tr. 63) On August 30, 
2012, an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant about his debts. (GE 6) Applicant said 
he would contact his creditors and work out a payment plan with his creditors. (GE 6)     
 
In sum, Applicant did not provide any evidence of payments to any SOR creditors 
after December 2012. Applicant did not describe any financial counseling. He did not 
provide a budget. He did not provide income information, such as federal income tax 
returns, showing his income for the last three years. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Section 26 of Applicant’s May 24, 2012 SF 86 asked whether in the last seven 
years any of the following events occurred: he defaulted on any loans; he had any bills 
turned over to a collection agency; he had any accounts charged off; he had been over 
120 days delinquent on any debts; and he is currently over 120 days delinquent on any 
debts. (GE 1; SOR ¶ 2.a) Applicant answered no to all of these questions. (GE 1) 
Applicant said at first he listed his debts on his SF 86, and then due to a malfunction, all 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the answers were “no.” (Tr. 53-55) Applicant explained his failure to disclose his 
delinquent debts as follows: 
 
When I was filling out the security clearance questionnaire, I had all day to 
fill out the question until the night, until these – when I got a financial part, 
I have a problem. So, when I respond [to] the question, okay, a repeat 
question. I just don’t know, and when I see the printout, all the question 
that was no, no, no, that is not – not my intention. (Tr. 47, 51-52) 
 
He admitted that he knew his answers were wrong. (Tr. 55) It was about 9:00 p.m., and 
he decided to turn in his SF 86. (Tr. 55)  
 
Applicant said on August 30, 2012 the OPM investigator “started right away the 
questions, so I was – as she asked me a question I responded. But I know that I have 
th[is] problem and when she asked me about it, ‘What do you think about it?’ I told her, 
this is what happened.” (Tr. 61) Later he said, “Before she called me I told her I had bad 
debts.” (Tr. 61, 66) He was unclear about the sequence of events during his OPM 
personal subject interview (PSI). (Tr. 61, 65-66) He denied that he had attempted to 
hide his financial situation. (Tr. 47, 50) He knew he had delinquent debts, but he was 
under pressure to complete the form because his employer wanted him to go to work 
the next day. (Tr. 48) He denied that he had any intention to deceive the DOD about his 
financial situation. (Tr. 48-49)  
 
The OPM summary of Applicant’s PSI indicates Applicant “was afforded the 
opportunity to provide any delinquent debts but non[e] were provided.” (GE 6) Applicant 
was then confronted with each delinquent debt on his credit report. (GE 6) He admitted 
that he was aware of some of his delinquent debts, but not others. (GE 6) 
           
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”; and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
OPM PSI, credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. Applicant’s SOR alleges 
12 delinquent, collection, or charged-off accounts and two judgments totaling $27,228. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition]. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant believes the accounts in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,276) and ¶ 1.d ($1,216) are 
duplications of each other. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($567) is being collected by the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.g ($567). He disputed his responsibility for the telecommunications 
debts in SOR ¶ 1.i ($70) and ¶ 1.m ($145), and he informed the creditors that he was 
not responsible for these debts. Applicant is credited with mitigating the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.m.  
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not establish full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts. He has been 
unemployed or underemployed for several years, and his income has been limited. 
Unemployment and underemployment are circumstances beyond his control that 
adversely affected his finances. However, he did not provide sufficient information about 
his finances to establish his inability to make greater progress paying his creditors, and 
he did not prove that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He did not 
establish that his inability to make some modest payments in the last three years on at 
least one debt. 
 
 Applicant did not provide documentation showing his income and expenses, and 
he did not provide a budget. He did not provide sufficient documentation relating to the 
SOR creditors: (1) more proof of payments, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the 
creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditor; (2) correspondence 
                                                                                                                                            
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to or from any creditors to establish maintenance of contact with creditors;5 (3) 
documented attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or 
agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these SOR debts; (4) evidence 
of financial counseling; or (5) other evidence of progress toward resolution of his SOR 
debts. 
 
  Applicant’s failure to prove that he lacked the funds or made more substantial 
steps to resolve his debts shows lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against 
approval of his security clearance. There is insufficient evidence that he was unable to 
make greater progress resolving his delinquent debts, or that his financial problems are 
being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish that financial consideration concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsification of his May 24, 2012 SF 86 used to 
process the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.6 
                                            
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
6The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant admitted that he submitted his May 24, 2012 SF 86 knowing that it did 
not contain derogatory financial information about his history of delinquent debt. AG ¶ 
16(a) is established.     
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant deliberately and improperly failed to disclose his debts over 120 days 
delinquent, debts in collection, charged-off debts, and a judgment on his May 24, 2012 
                                                                                                                                            
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SF 86. An intentional omission allegation is not mitigated when an applicant admits the 
omission after an investigator tells him or her that the government has already learned 
facts establishing the omission.7 In ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 
2007) the Appeal Board considered an applicant’s claim that he promptly disclosed his 
firing from employment to an investigator after falsely denying the termination from 
employment on his security clearance application stating: 
 
. . . Applicant did not disclose his termination from the hotel until he was at 
his security clearance interview. The . . . investigating agent asked about 
the hotel in the context of previous employments and Applicant indicated 
he worked there. The investigator then asked if anyone at the hotel would 
have anything negative to say about Applicant, at which time Applicant 
supplied the investigator with a name and the hotel management. 
Subsequently, Applicant informed the investigator that he had been fired 
from the hotel.  
 
 The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2007) 
affirmed the administrative judge’s decision not to credit applicant with making a 
“prompt, good faith [effort] to correct the falsification before being confronted with the 
facts.” Id. at 4-5. Stated differently, once it becomes apparent to an applicant that an 
investigator is likely to discover derogatory information, it is too late to receive mitigating 
credit under AG ¶ 17(a). In the instant case, Applicant said he disclosed the omission 
concerning his finances before being confronted with specific information from his credit 
report. The OPM PSI indicates he disclosed derogatory financial information after being 
confronted with the facts. I accept the OPM PSI as more credible than Applicant’s 
statement at his hearing. The OPM investigator had no known reason to fabricate the 
content of the interview, and it was written in 2012, which was closer in time or more 
contemporaneous to the Applicant’s PSI interview than Applicant’s description of that 
interview at his hearing.    
 
 In sum, Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application by 
intentionally failing to disclose his negative financial information was improper and 
raised a security concern. He did not correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts. No mitigating conditions apply. Guideline E 
concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                            
7ISCR Case No. 02-30369 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2006) (sustaining denial of security clearance); 
ISCR Case No. 04-00789 at 7 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006) (reversing grant of security clearance); ISCR 
Case No. 99-0557 at 4 (App. Bd. July 10, 2000) (reversing grant of security clearance).   
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 61-year-old financial-management analyst. In 1983, he received a bachelor’s 
degree, and in 1987, he received a law degree in a foreign country. He has been 
unemployed or underemployed for several years, and his income has been limited. 
Unemployment and underemployment are circumstances beyond his control. He 
expressed an intention to pay his creditors when able to do so. Applicant is credited with 
mitigating the debts in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,276) and ¶ 1.k ($567) as duplications, and the 
debts in SOR ¶ 1.i ($70) and ¶ 1.m ($145) as being disputed. There is no evidence of 
security violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs.  
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems. His SOR, OPM PSI, and credit reports 
allege 12 delinquent, collection, or charged-off accounts and two judgments totaling 
$27,228. Even after mitigating four debts, he is left with delinquent debts totaling about 
$25,000. Applicant failed to provide sufficient documentation of progress resolving his 
financial problems. He did not provide any documentary evidence of payments to SOR 
creditors, payment plans, or his communications to SOR creditors, showing his attempts 
to resolve his SOR debts. He did not establish that he was unable to make some 
modest payments to at least one SOR creditor. His failure to provide more corroborating 
documentation shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises 
unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More specific and documented information about 
inability to pay debts or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security 
concerns.  
Applicant intentionally failed to accurately disclose his delinquent debts on his 
May 24, 2012 SF 86. The DOD relies upon security clearance holders to provide 
accurate information especially in a security context, even when that disclosure may not 
be advantageous to the security clearance holder’s financial or career interests.  
Applicant’s “lack of candor . . . raise[s] questions about [his] reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information.” AG ¶ 15. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
