 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case  No. 14-01837    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Burks, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence and personal conduct concerns 
raised by his failure to provide full, frank, and candid disclosure about his foreign 
interests and contacts during the security clearance adjudication process. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 27, 2014, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing the security concerns under the foreign influence and personal conduct 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
guidelines. DOHA recommended the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination to revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on June 4, 2015, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 and Applicant’s Exhibit 
(AE) A, were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented the testimony 
of one witness. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 12, 2015. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about the People’s Republic of China (China). Without objection from Applicant, I 
approved the request. China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the 
Chinese Communist Party. China has a poor record with respect to human rights, 
suppresses political dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, 
forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners. Also, China actively engages 
in espionage against the United States.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 60, has worked for a federal contractor since 2003, working at U.S. 
embassy locations in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. He has worked for his current 
employer since October 2008. A retired U.S. Army master sergeant, Applicant has held 
a security clearance since at least 1980.  Applicant described his 22-year military career 
and his employment history with federal contractors in favorable terms, but he did not 
submit any other evidence to support these claims. Applicant completed his most recent 
security clearance application in June 2012, when he was working at a U.S. embassy in 
Southeast Asia. He disclosed maintaining monthly contact with one foreign national who 
is a resident and citizen of China. Before the subject interview, a background 
investigator contacted Applicant requesting information about any other foreign 
contacts. Applicant did not disclose any additional contacts.4  
 
During his September 2012 subject interview Applicant revealed that he has a 
girlfriend and a daughter, now 4 years old, who are residents and citizens of China. He 
concealed these relationships from his wife of 29 years, his mother, and other family 
members and friends. Applicant met the woman, a masseuse, in October 2007 when he 
was working at a U.S. embassy in China. She provided massage services to Applicant. 
Their relationship eventually became sexual. Applicant claims he reported the contact to 
his security officer, but those reports are not in the record.5  
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated January 16, 2015, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 The request and the attached documents have been included in the record as HE II. 
 
4 Tr. 32-38, 90-92; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 92-93; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
In 2009, Applicant began sending the woman, whom he considers his girlfriend, 
$1,500 per month to pay for her housing and other expenses.  To facilitate the transfer 
of money to her, Applicant opened a bank account in China in 2010. He allowed the 
account to go inactive after learning that he would be required to disclose the foreign 
asset.  According to Applicant, his girlfriend used some of the monthly income she 
received from Applicant to purchase a home. Applicant believes the house, which he 
repeatedly referred to as ‘his home’ during the background interview, is valued at 
$30,000. Between October 2007 and December 2011, Applicant took at least five trips 
to China to visit her. His last visit coincided with the birth of their daughter. Applicant 
admitted to the investigator that he did not disclose his connections to China because 
he feared adverse employment action. He also told the investigator that his connections 
to China did not warrant disclosure on the security clearance application. Applicant 
explained that he does not provide financial support to his girlfriend, but makes 
donations to her to use in the manner she sees fit. He does not classify their child as his 
relative, but an obligation. Applying this reasoning, Applicant did not report his child as a 
foreign contact to the security officer at his work location at the time of her birth.6  
 
At each opportunity presented, Applicant has tried to distance himself from the 
disclosures he made during his September 2012 subject interview. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant reported that he and his wife had been separated since 2008. Applicant 
claims that his wife knows about the girlfriend and their daughter. He also states that 
she supports his relationship with them. The record does not contain any evidence to 
corroborate this statement. In both his answer to the SOR and his testimony at hearing, 
Applicant continued to disavow his child despite maintaining daily electronic and 
telephonic contact with her mother. Applicant continues to hide the existence of his 
girlfriend and child from his family and friends. He told his mother, who testified on his 
behalf, about them only a month before the hearing. Conversely, Applicant declared his 
intention to marry his girlfriend and bring her and the child to the United States. He 
believes that marriage will legitimize the relationship and his paternity of the child. 
However, he has not taken any steps to dissolve his existing marriage.7  
 
At hearing, Applicant continued to justify his omissions from his June 2012 
security clearance application. Applicant claims that he did not understand the foreign 
contacts and interests questions posed on the questionnaire. Applicant testified that he 
interpreted the question regarding providing financial support to foreign nationals to 
apply only to financial support provided to a foreign government.  He interpreted the 
question about foreign travel as applying to travel that occurred from the United States. 
He did not believe the security clearance application required him to report private 
international travel that occurred while he was working outside the United States. He did 
not report the Chinese bank account because he never used it.8  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 32-32; GE 2.  
 
7 Tr. 39-40, 67-77, 85, 107-108; Answer; GE 2; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. 29, 57-61, 80-81, 87-89. 
 
 
4 
 
When asked at hearing, Applicant, who prides himself on his security 
consciousness, was able to clearly articulate the potential security concerns raised by 
having foreign contacts and interests. He believes that his foreign contacts and interests 
did not present a security issue. In Applicant’s opinion, he fulfilled the reporting 
requirement by reporting his girlfriend as a foreign contact and his trips to China to the 
security officer at his work site. In doing so, he considered the foreign contacts 
approved and believed that disclosing these contacts again on the security clearance 
application would have been redundant. (Since meeting his girlfriend in 2007, Applicant 
has worked for the same federal contractor, at three different locations, in two countries. 
It is unclear from the record if he reported the foreign contact to the security officer at 
each location.) Applicant also reasoned that he did not need to report his daughter to 
his security manager as a foreign contact. Although she is Applicant’s biological child, 
he does not consider her a relative. At the time he completed the security clearance 
application, Applicant believes that his daughter was not a reportable foreign contact 
because she could not yet talk.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 38-44, 66-67, 72 -77, 88-90, 95-97. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”10 Heavily weighted in this 
calculus is the identity of the country.11 Typically, an applicant’s close contacts and 
significant financial interests in China, a country that is known for its acts of industrial 
espionage against the United States and its poor human rights record, would be enough 
to find a heighted risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or 
coercion.12 However, this case is atypical in that the situs of Applicant’s foreign contacts 
and interests, while relevant, is not the primary concern. While it is possible that 
Applicant’s girlfriend and child could be subject to pressure from the Chinese 
government, based on Applicant’s statements during this adjudication, I find it unlikely 
that any such pressure would cause Applicant to compromise U.S. interests. Applicant’s 
statements make it clear that, in response to any pressure, he could easily disencumber 
himself of the relationships. He can continue to deny paternity of his child, stop any 
donations he may send to her mother, and cease all contact. 
  
  Here, the primary security concern is raised by Applicant’s failure to report, when 
required, his association with foreign nationals and the depth of his interests in a foreign 
country.13 Although Applicant recognized the particular problem with having foreign 
connections and interests in China, the identity of the country was not the motivation for 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 6.  
 
11 AG ¶ 6. 
 
12 See AG ¶ 7(a).  
 
13 AG ¶ 7(f).  
 
 
6 
 
the deception. Most likely, he would have acted similarly if he had foreign contacts and 
interests in a country considered politically neutral or friendly to the United States. 
Applicant’s foreign contacts created a conflict of interest with his duties and obligations 
as a clearance holder. He resolved the conflict, not in favor of protecting his foreign 
contacts or interests, but in his own self-interest. Applicant feared that reporting his 
foreign contacts and interests would have had a negative effect on his employment 
opportunities. Once his fears proved correct, Applicant became more reticent about full 
disclosure, thwarting the government’s efforts to fully evaluate the associated security 
risks. None of the foreign influence mitigating conditions apply. 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s failure to fully disclose his foreign contacts and interests also raises 
concerns under the personal conduct guideline. An applicant’s failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process raises issues about his 
reliability and trustworthiness that ultimately calls into question his ability to protect 
classified information.14 Of special interest is an Applicant’s failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process.15 The SOR alleges that 
Applicant concealed the existence of his girlfriend and daughter from his wife. (SOR ¶ 
2.a.) The SOR also alleges that Applicant deliberately omitted the certain foreign 
contacts and interests he has in China from his June 2012 security clearance 
application, specifically: his daughter (SOR ¶ 2.b), the financial interest Applicant has in 
his girlfriend’s home (SOR ¶¶ 2.c – 2.d), the bank account he opened in China in 2010 
(SOR ¶ 2.c), the ongoing financial support Applicant provided his girlfriend (SOR ¶ 2.e), 
and his five trips to China between 2007 and 2011 (SOR ¶ 2.f).  
 
Throughout this adjudication, Applicant has proved incredible, untrustworthy, and 
unreliable. For the past several years, Applicant has deliberately concealed his foreign 
contacts and interests from his spouse and the government.16 He has doled out this 
information on what he determines is a need-to-know basis. While this is a decision 
Applicant is free to make in his personal life, it is unacceptable as a clearance holder. 
The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to make “an examination of a 
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is 
an acceptable security risk.”17 Because Applicant has deliberately sought to conceal 
relevant and material information about his foreign interests and contacts, the 
government has been unable to complete this assessment.  
 
The motive for Applicant’s deception to his wife and to the government is clear; 
he wanted to avoid possible adverse personal and employment consequences. 
Applicant, who has undergone periodic reinvestigations for his security clearance every 
                                                          
14 See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
15 See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
16 AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (c). 
 
17 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
7 
 
five years since at least 1980, feigned misunderstanding and offered disingenuous 
misinterpretations of the foreign contacts and foreign interest questions on the security 
clearance application. The language of the foreign contact and foreign interests 
questions at issue are plain. A reasonable person would have known to disclose the 
information he sought to conceal. Furthermore, Applicant demonstrated his 
understanding of the importance of the background investigation process and the 
necessity of disclosing the foreign contacts and interests he attempted to conceal from 
the government.  
 
Applicant did not present any information to mitigate the personal conduct 
concerns raised by his deceptive conduct. Given Applicant’s total lack of credibility, the 
government cannot assume with any degree of certainty that Applicant, who has worked 
in at least six different countries in the last 10 years, has fully disclosed all of his foreign 
contacts and interests as required or that he has been honest about the personal 
histories of his foreign contacts. Accordingly, Applicant’s conduct cannot be considered 
minor and continues to reflect negatively on his current security worthiness.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, serious doubts remain about Applicant’s ongoing security 
worthiness. In reaching this decision, I have also considered the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2.  Applicant irreparably breached his fiduciary duty to the government. His efforts 
to actively stymie the government’s ability to access his ongoing security worthiness 
represent an unacceptable security risk. This risk is not mitigated by Applicant’s 
favorable characterization of his military career and post-military employment history.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a - 2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
  
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
