 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06250 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 9, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on July 22, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the 
 
2 
 
FORM on August 20, 2015. She responded with documents that I have marked 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C. The case was assigned to me on October 13, 
2015. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A through C are admitted 
in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has a 
bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 1979. Her second marriage ended in divorce in 
2000. She has a 27-year-old daughter.1   
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling about $81,000 and an unpaid 
$5,984 judgment from 2011. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges the underlying debt of $8,878 that 
resulted in the judgment, so the actual total amount owed is less than that alleged. The 
debts include a defaulted student loan and credit card accounts. Applicant admitted 
owing all the debts with the exception of the $154 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, which she 
established was paid in March 2015. Credit reports from March 2013 and October 2014 
also substantiate the debts.2   
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to being laid off from two jobs in 2012 
and from an additional job in 2013. She also switched jobs twice in 2014 because of the 
“cost of travel to and from job site.” However, she worked for the same company from 
2001 through January 2012, and several of the debts became delinquent before 2012.3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $58,282 defaulted student loan. Applicant took out the loan 
for her daughter’s college education. Credit reports indicate the loan was initiated in 
2007, and the date of last action was 2010. Applicant should have started paying the 
loan in 2010, but she fell behind on other loans and credit cards, and she made no 
payments. She indicated in her September 2015 response to the FORM that she was 
on a payment plan for the loan. She did not submit any supporting documentation.4 
 
Applicant submitted settlement agreements with the collection company handling 
the $808 and $599 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. She stated that she paid the 
settlement amounts of $606 and $479 on September 16, 2015. I accept without 
corroborating documentation that the settlement payments were made.5 
 
Applicant stated that now that she has stable employment again, she is doing 
much better at meeting her obligations, and she plans to pay her debts. She wrote in 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4.  
 
2 Items 2, 3.  
 
3 Item 2; AE A. 
 
4 Items 2, 4, 6, 7. 
 
5 Items 2, 4, 6, 7; AE A-C. 
 
3 
 
response to the FORM that she had payment plans for the remaining delinquent debts. 
She did not submit any supporting documentation.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
                                                          
6 Item 2; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $8,878 debt that was the basis for the $5,984 judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged 
twice). SOR ¶ 1.c is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant attributed her financial problems to being laid off from two jobs in 2012 
and from an additional job in 2013. She also switched jobs twice in 2014 because of the 
“cost of travel to and from job site.” Those events were beyond her control. However, 
she worked for the same company from 2001 through January 2012, and she had 
significant financial problems before 2012, including a defaulted student loan and a 
2011 judgment for an unpaid credit card.  
 
Applicant paid the $154 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g in March 2015. She settled 
the $808 and $599 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f in September 2015. Those 
debts are mitigated. She stated that she made payment arrangements for the remaining 
debts, but she did not submit supporting documentation. Applicant resolved $1,561 of 
her delinquent debts. She still owes more than $76,000. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:7    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 There are no Subparagraphs 1.h or 1.i.  
 
