 
 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-00607 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant continues to possess a valid United Kingdom passport, which does not 
expire until January 2020. Applicant did not indicate his United Kingdom “passport has 
been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated” 
under Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 11(e). Security concerns pertaining to foreign 
preference are not mitigated. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 20, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86). (Item 1) On August 6, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,  
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the AGs, which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF made a preliminary decision to 
deny or revoke Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign preference guideline.  
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The file does not contain a response to the SOR; however, on September 3, 
2015, Applicant waived his right to a hearing. (Item 1) On September 23, 2015, 
Department Counsel completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On October 7, 
2015, Applicant received the FORM. Applicant provided a November 5, 2015 response 
to the FORM. On November 12, 2015, Department Counsel stated she had no objection 
to the Applicant’s FORM response. On November 17, 2015, the case was assigned to 
me. The Government’s case consisted of three exhibits. (Items 1-3)  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I have taken administrative notice of some basic facts concerning the relationship 
of the United Kingdom to the United States. Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-
11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 
12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most 
common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are 
either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 
25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). 
Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative information or sources from 
the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing internet 
sources for numerous facts and documents).  
 
In this case, the source for the facts concerning the United Kingdom is a verbatim 
quotation from the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, 
Fact Sheet U.S. Relations with United Kingdom, April 30, 2015, available at 
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3846.htm. (HE 1)  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s FORM response, Applicant said on January 25, 2010, he renewed 
his United Kingdom passport while he was living in the United States as a permanent 
resident or green card holder. (SOR ¶ 1.a) He did not indicate that his “passport has 
been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated.” See AG ¶ 11(e). He also provided some extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old enterprise architect employed by a technology 
company since April 2014.2 He was born in the United Kingdom, and in 1986, he 
received a degree in the United Kingdom in software engineering. In 1998, he entered 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph and the next paragraph 
is Applicant’s June 20, 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86). 
(Item 2) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the United States. In 2005, he married, and he does not have any children. In 2010, he 
was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. Applicant and his spouse live in the United States. 
Applicant has a United Kingdom pension fund with an estimated value of $110,000. He 
does not own any real estate in the United Kingdom. (Item 3) 
 
In June 2014, Applicant offered to renounce his United Kingdom citizenship. After 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2010, he used his United States passport for all 
foreign travel. (Item 3) There is no evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol, 
arrests, convictions, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
The FORM reads as follows: 
 
Absent documentation that Applicant has surrendered or destroyed his 
foreign passport, this precludes a finding that he is not exercising his 
rights of foreign citizenship and can be cleared for access to classified 
information, and establishes the basis for disqualification under Directive 
5220.6, Guideline C, Paragraph 10(a)(1). (FORM at 2) 
 
Applicant’s FORM explained that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the 
FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections 
or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative 
Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM 
at 2) Applicant submitted some additional information about when and why he obtained 
his United Kingdom passport. However, he did not provide information that his United 
Kingdom “passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, 
or otherwise invalidated” under Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 11(e). 
 
United Kingdom 
 
The first, short-lived British colony in Virginia was organized in 1584, and 
permanent English settlement began in 1607. The United States declared its 
independence from Great Britain in 1776. The American Revolutionary War ended in 
1783, with Great Britain recognizing U.S. independence. The two countries established 
diplomatic relations in 1785. The United States broke relations when it declared war on 
the United Kingdom during the War of 1812; relations were reestablished in 1815. 
 
The United States has no closer ally than the United Kingdom, and British foreign 
policy emphasizes close coordination with the United States. Bilateral cooperation 
reflects the common language, ideals, and democratic practices of the two nations. 
Relations were strengthened by the United Kingdom's alliance with the United States 
during both World Wars, in the Korean conflict, in the Persian Gulf War, in Operation 
Iraqi Freedom, and in Afghanistan, as well as through its role as a founding member of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The United Kingdom and the United 
States continually consult on foreign policy issues and global problems and share major 
foreign and security policy objectives. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Regarding Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom, “Nationalist” 
and “Republican” groups seek a united Ireland that includes Northern Ireland, while 
“Unionists” and “Loyalists” want Northern Ireland to remain part of the United Kingdom. 
U.S. priorities continue to be supporting the peace process and devolved political 
institutions in Northern Ireland and encouraging the implementation of the U.S.-
brokered 1998 Belfast Agreement, also known as the Good Friday Agreement, and the 
2006 St. Andrews Agreement. 
 
U.S. Assistance to the United Kingdom 
 
The International Fund for Ireland (IFI), created in 1986, provides funding for 
projects to generate cross-community engagement and economic opportunity in 
Northern Ireland (the United Kingdom) and the border counties of Ireland. Since the 
IFI's establishment, the United States and EU have contributed the vast majority of 
funds, with the United States allocating more than $540 million. 
 
Bilateral Economic Relations 
 
The United Kingdom is a member of the European Union and a major 
international trading power. The United Kingdom is one of the largest markets for U.S. 
goods exports and one of the largest suppliers of U.S. imports. The United States and 
the United Kingdom share the world's largest bilateral foreign direct investment 
partnerships. The United Kingdom is a large source of foreign tourists visiting the United 
States. It participates in the Visa Waiver Program, which allows nationals of 
participating countries to travel to the United States for certain business or tourism 
purposes for stays of 90 days or less without obtaining a visa. 
 
The United Kingdom's Membership in International Organizations 
 
The United Kingdom and the United States belong to a number of the same 
international organizations, including the United Nations, North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization, Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe, G-20, G-8, Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Organization. 
The United Kingdom also is an observer to the Organization of American States. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes one condition that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case, “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation 
of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport.” Applicant did not renew his United Kingdom passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen; however, he continues to possess a United Kingdom passport that will be valid 
until January 2020, establishing AG ¶ 10(a). Consideration of the applicability of 
mitigating conditions is required. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant offered to renounce his 
United Kingdom citizenship. He did not indicate that he planned or had taken any 
specific steps to renounce his United Kingdom citizenship. Applicant did not invalidate 
or relinquish his United Kingdom passport. Applicant was advised in the FORM that he 
could mitigate Foreign Preference concerns through AG ¶ 11(e), however, he did not 
take action to effectuate this mitigating provision. Foreign preference security concerns 
are not mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline C, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old enterprise architect employed by a technology 
company since April 2014. He was born in the United Kingdom, and he entered the 
United States in 1998. In June 2014, he offered to renounce his United Kingdom 
citizenship; however, he did not describe any plans or actions to actually do so. He was 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2010. Applicant and his spouse live in the United States. 
Applicant has a United Kingdom pension fund with an estimated value of $110,000. 
There is no evidence of security violations, violations of his employer’s rules, abuse of 
alcohol, arrests, convictions, or use of illegal drugs.  
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The U.S. State Department United Kingdom Fact Sheet emphasizes, “The United 
States has no closer ally than the United Kingdom, and British foreign policy 
emphasizes close coordination with the United States.” The United States and United 
Kingdom have shared sensitive and classified information and engaged in joint combat 
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. There is no reason to believe the United Kingdom 
government and/or United Kingdom intelligence personnel would violate United 
Kingdom, United States or international law, by using improper and/or illegal means to 
obtain classified information from Applicant. The key rationale for denying Applicant’s 
clearance is his continued retention of a valid United Kingdom passport after being 
clearly advised by Department Counsel that he could mitigate security concerns by 
ensuring his “passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated” under AG ¶ 11(e). In light of his retention of his 
United Kingdom passport, I cannot give him full credit for offering to renounce his United 
Kingdom citizenship.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person, and I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Foreign preference security concerns 
are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
