 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-00020 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. DOD CAF acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 6, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM)1 on August 29, 2015. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-5 and is admitted into the record. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on September 14, 2015. Applicant was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. She submitted exhibits (AE) A-E, which were admitted without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on October 13, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied all the debts listed in the SOR and 
the allegation that she provided false information on her trustworthiness application. 
After a careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following findings of 
fact.2 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She has worked for a federal contractor since April 
2014. She worked in the private sector from July 2013 until assuming her current 
position. She experienced periods of unemployment from May to July 2013, and 
October 2010 to October 2011. She is single, never married, and has no children. She 
has a high school diploma. She has no military experience, but held a security 
clearance when she worked for a federal agency from 1988 to 1997.3  
  
 The SOR lists 11 delinquent debts totaling approximately $15,786.4 The debts 
include eight collection accounts, two charged-off accounts, and a vehicle repossession. 
The debts are supported by credit reports from May 2014 and August 2015 and by 
Applicant’s statements to a defense investigator in May 2014.5 
 
 The personal conduct allegation includes deliberately providing false information 
while completing her trustworthiness application in April 2014 by failing to list the vehicle 
repossession and her other past-due financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose as a result of her unemployment from 2010 
to 2011. She has only recently been able to address her financial problems since 
obtaining her current job. She failed to present evidence of receiving financial 
                                                          
1 In the FORM, Department Counsel styled this case as an ISCR case when the SOR indicated that it 
was an ADP trustworthiness determination. My decision is written in the posture of an ADP case. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Items 2-3. 
 
4 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.l reflect the same underlying debt. I find in favor of Applicant regarding ¶ 1.l. See Item 
4. 
 
5 Items 3-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
counseling. There is no evidence of a current budget or earnings and expense 
statement.6 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (charged-off account for $39): 
 
 Applicant claims she paid this debt, but failed to supply any supporting 
documentation. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (collection account for $678): 
 
 Applicant disputes this debt, but did not provide documentary proof of the basis 
of the dispute or actions she has taken to resolve the debt. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (repossession for $2,389): 
 
 Applicant disputed this debt. She claims she traded the vehicle and the balance 
was satisfied. She did not supply documentation supporting her claim that this debt was 
paid. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (collection account for $935): 
 
 Applicant disputes this debt, but did not provide documentary proof of the basis 
of the dispute or actions she has taken to resolve the debt. This debt is unresolved.10  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (collection account for $3,572): 
 
 Applicant claims to have contacted the creditor to set up a payment plan, but 
failed to provide documentation of such a plan. This debt is unresolved.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (collection account): 
 
 Applicant disputes this debt, but did not provide documentary proof of the basis 
of the dispute or actions she has taken to resolve the debt. She provided documentation 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 3; AE A-E. 
 
7 Item 1; AE A-E. 
 
8 Item 1, AE A-E. 
 
9 Item 1; AE A-E. 
 
10 Item 1, AE A-E. 
 
11 Item 1, AE A-E. 
 
 
4 
 
 
showing she reached a settlement payment plan with the creditor, but did not provide 
proof of any payments. This debt is unresolved.12 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.i (medical collection accounts for $218, $6,320, $58):   
 
 Applicant disputes these debts claiming that her insurance should have covered 
these debts, but she did not provide documentary proof of the basis of the dispute or 
actions she has taken to resolve the debts. These debts are unresolved.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j (collection account for $1,259): 
 
 Applicant disputes this debt, but did not provide documentary proof of the basis 
of the dispute or actions she has taken to resolve the debt. This debt is unresolved.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k (collection account for $317): 
 
 Applicant claims she paid this debt, but failed to supply any supporting 
documentation. This debt is unresolved.15 
 
 On April 25, 2014, Applicant completed her trustworthiness questionnaire. She 
answered “no” to the question concerning whether she had any property repossessed, 
whether she had any debts turned over to a collection agency within the last seven 
years, whether she had defaulted on any loans within the last seven years, and whether 
she had any account or credit card suspended, charged-off, or cancelled for failure to 
pay. The answer to all those questions should have been “yes.” Applicant claimed that 
she misunderstood the questions and had no intent to deceive when she answered as 
she did.16 
 
 Applicant offered character letters from a coworker, a friend, and her mother. All 
attest to her work ethic, loyalty, and trustworthiness.17 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
                                                          
12 Item 1, AE B. 
 
13 Item 1, AE B. 
 
14 Item 1, AE A-E. 
 
15 Item 1; AE A-E. 
 
16 Items 1. 
 
17 AE C-E. 
 
 
5 
 
 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel 
Management. DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures 
contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be 
made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the trustworthiness concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
I have considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both the 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant presented evidence that the debts were due to circumstances 
beyond her control, namely her periods of unemployment. For this mitigating condition 
to apply, she must also show responsible action toward resolving the debts. She failed 
to show proof of any action to resolve these debts or that she received any financial 
counseling. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but, ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) do not apply. She also 
failed to supply documentation to support her dispute of the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct trustworthiness concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the trustworthiness determination process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the trustworthiness determination 
process. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant failed to provide accurate delinquent-debt information as she was 
required to do on her trustworthiness application. She claims her failure to list this 
information was not deliberate. She claims she misunderstood the nature of the 
questions. Because this is an administrative determination, I cannot make a credibility 
finding; however, I find that the questions on the application are not confusing or 
misleading. This persuades me that she deliberately failed to list her debt information on 
his trustworthiness application in 2014. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 
8 
 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s 
falsifications. Falsifying information on a trustworthiness application is not a minor 
offense and doing so casts doubt on her trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position 
of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the circumstances that 
led to Applicant’s financial problems. She failed to show a track record of financial 
stability and provided false information on her trustworthiness application.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.l:     For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
position of trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
