1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00488
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 24, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on September 2, 2012.  On June 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
H and E for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 12, 2013.  He answered the
SOR in writing on June 14, 2013, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  DOHA received the request on June 17, 2013, and I received the case
assignment on August 1, 2013.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 6, 2013,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 27, 2013.  The Government offered
Exhibits (GXs) 1 and 2, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on his
2
own behalf and submitted Exhibit (AppX) A, which was received without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on September 4, 2013.  I granted
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until September 27, 2013, to submit
additional matters.  On September 7, 2013, he submitted Exhibit B, which was received
without objection. The record closed on September 27, 2013.  Based upon a review of
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the
Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement & Guideline E - Personal Conduct
Applicant is 58 years of age, and has held a security clearance for “11 years.”
(TR at page 19 lines 23~25, and at  page 21 lines 10~15.)  Prior to the marijuana use at
issue, he last used marijuana “in 1971,” more than 40 years ago.  (TR at page 21 line
16 to page 22 line 3.)
1.a., 1.b., 2.a. and 2.b.  While in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, in May of 2012,
Applicant purchased and used marijuana on one occasion.  (TR at page 17 line 10 to
page 21 line 9.)  He did not view this one time usage as problematic, as the purchase
and use of the drug was legal under Dutch law.  (Id.)  Although he did not report this
usage upon his return to the United States, Applicant did disclose it four months later on
his September 2012 e-QIP.  (GX 1 at page 34.)  Applicant now understands the
concerns of the Government as to the use of marijuana.  (TR at page 24 line 15 to page
25 line 13.)  He has foresworn the abuse of any drugs in the future, and has signed a
statement of intent acknowledging “automatic revocation of . . . [his] security clearance”
for any future drug abuse.  (TR at page 28 lines 8~12, and AppX B at page 2.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
3
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
Paragraph 24:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline also notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.
Under Subparagraph 25(a), “any drug abuse” may be disqualifying.  In addition, the
4
“illegal . . . purchase . . .” under Subparagraph 25(c), and “any illegal drug use after
being granted a security clearance” under Subparagraph 25(g) may be disqualifying.
Here, Applicant used marijuana once in 2012 after having been granted a security
clearance.
These are countered, however, by the mitigating conditions found in
Subparagraphs 26(a) and 26(b).  Applicant’s “behavior . . . happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur . . .”  Furthermore, he has shown “a
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (4) a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.”  The
Applicant purchased and used marijuana in Amsterdam where it was legal to do so,
mistakenly thinking such use would not affect his security clearance.  He now realizes
that such conduct is not compatible with holding a security clearance, and has signed a
letter of intent not to abuse any drugs in the future.  I find his statement of intent to be
credible and sincere.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(e)(2), “personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress, such as . . . while in another country, engaging in any activity . .
. that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or other group”
Here, Applicant used marijuana, which is legal under Dutch law, but illegal under U. S.
Federal law.  However, the countervailing Mitigating Condition 17(e) is applicable here,
in that “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  Applicant has disclosed his one time drug abuse
to the Government, and has eschewed any future usage.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Subparagraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
5
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Subparagraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The Applicant has the unqualified support
of those who know him in the workplace.  (AppX A, and B at page 3).  The record
evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns arising from his Drug Involvement and related Personal Conduct.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
