 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00496 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 8, 2014, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 15, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 21, 2014. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through C, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was left open until 
August 28, 2014, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. They 
were marked AE D and E and were admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 2, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He graduated from high school and served in the Navy 
from 1989 to 1996 and was honorably discharged. He married in 1991 and divorced in 
February 1999. He has one child from the marriage who is 21 years old. He remarried in 
December 1999 and separated from his wife in April 2013. He has filed for divorce and 
it is pending. He has three children from the marriage, ages 13, 10 and 6. The eldest 
child has lived with him since approximately April 2014, and he anticipates the second 
child will come to live with him soon.2  
 
 Throughout Applicant’s marriage, his wife has handled all of the financial matters, 
including making payments on their first and second mortgages and paying all of their 
other bills. SOR ¶ 1.b ($36,250) is the second mortgage and ¶ 1.c ($56,566) is the first 
mortgage. His wife did not work outside of the home. From March 2005 to May 2012, 
Applicant believed his wife was making their monthly mortgage payments. In May 2012 
he received a telephone call from the creditor holding his first mortgage advising him he 
was nine months delinquent in paying the mortgage. Applicant then learned his wife 
was not paying either mortgage payments. Despite extensive discussion with her, he 
could not determine where she spent the money that was intended for the family 
expenses. In August 2012, Applicant sought assistance from Consumer Credit 
Counseling Services (CCCS). No additional payments were made on the two debts.3  
 
 Applicant’s wife had weight-loss surgery in November 2012 and sometime after 
that he learned she had been having a long-term relationship with Applicant’s friend and 
neighbor. Applicant indicated his wife completely gave up on their marriage and ignored 
their finances. He was unaware that she was no longer paying their bills and the money 
was being spent elsewhere.4  
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email stating he had no objection to the exhibits. 
 
2 Tr. 28, 33-34. 
 
3 Tr. 22-25, 35, 38-47, 50; Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 Answer to SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
In April 2013, Applicant and his wife separated. Applicant attempted to resolve 
the mortgage debts through a short-sale but was unsuccessful. He remained in the 
house for two months after their separation and moved out in June 2013 when the 
house was foreclosed. The property was sold in August 2013, and there was a $34,000 
deficiency. The creditor contacted Applicant and advised him that it has elected to write-
off the deficiency and hold all obligors harmless of the deficiency balance. It also 
advised him there may be tax implications. Applicant is aware that he may have to pay 
additional taxes due to this write-off.5 
 
 Applicant also provided correspondence from the counselor he has been working 
with at CCCS regarding the second mortgage. He has been working with her since 
August 2012 and they have attempted to communicate with the creditor of the second 
mortgage, but have been unsuccessful. Applicant, through the assistance of his 
counselor, continues to attempt to resolve this debt.6  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($50) is a medical debt incurred for an emergency room 
visit for Applicant’s son. Applicant was unaware of the debt. He contacted the creditor 
and paid the debt.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($762) is a credit card debt incurred by his wife. She was 
the only one who used the card. He has contacted the creditor. He has filed for divorce 
and has an attorney. Part of the divorce settlement will be allocating liabilities. Once a 
decision is made, if he is responsible to pay this debt, he intends to do so.8 
 
 After Applicant’s separation, he spent about $1,000 to move his wife and their 
children into an apartment. He also spent approximately $3,600 to purchase her a car. 
He paid $1,000 a month in child support, which he continues to do. He provided proof of 
his consistent child support payments. He does not have any credit cards. He drives a 
1998 vehicle. He lives in an affordable trailer. He is current on his other debts. He 
credibly testified that he has been working hard to pay all of his debts and do the right 
thing. If he does not have the funds, he will not make a purchase.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 Tr. 38-47; Answer to SOR.  
 
6 Tr. 38-47; Answer to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. 25-26; Answer to SOR. 
 
8 Tr. 26, 48-49; GE 3 page 6; Answer to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. 34-37, 52, 56; AE D, E. 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following is 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.  
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debts when unbeknownst to him his wife stopped 
paying the family expenses and diverted the funds elsewhere. I find there is sufficient 
evidence to raise the above disqualifying condition.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of action to resolve the issue. 
 
 Throughout his marriage, Applicant relied on his wife to handle their finances. 
She did not work outside of the home, and she was responsible for paying the bills. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant learned that she had not paid their mortgages for nine months and was 
diverting the funds elsewhere. When he learned about the delinquent debts he sought 
assistance from CCCS and has been working with a counselor since then to resolve his 
financial problems. His home was foreclosed and the deficiency has been written off. He 
understands there may be tax consequences. He and his CCCS counselor have 
attempted to communicate with the creditor for the second mortgage, but have been 
unsuccessful. He intends to resolve the credit card debt after his divorce allocates a 
division of assets and liabilities. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
His financial problems were the result of his wife failing to pay the family bills and 
diverting the resources elsewhere. Applicant had no history of financial problems before 
this occurred. He sought financial counseling shortly after becoming aware of the 
problems and continues to work with a counselor to resolve the remaining issues. 
Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control, and he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. Although the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d have not yet been 
resolved, Applicant has not ignored them. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b) and 20(c) apply. Applicant 
has only paid one debt at this juncture. AG¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant does not 
dispute the debts, so AG ¶ 20(e) was not raised.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He was married for almost 14 years when he learned of 
his wife’s infidelity and that she had not paid the family bills for approximately nine 
months. The house he lived in with his family was foreclosed. He sought financial 
counseling before he received the SOR, so he could resolve his financial problems. To 
ensure his children’s care, he set his wife up in an apartment. He has consistently paid 
child support and currently has custody of one of the children. He hopes to have 
custody of a second child soon. Applicant is willing to pay the remaining debts, but one 
creditor has been uncommunicative and the other was a debt incurred by his wife. He is 
waiting for his divorce order to determine who should pay that debt. Through no fault of 
his own, Applicant found himself in financial distress and has worked hard to do the best 
he could. He has a meager lifestyle and only buys what he can afford. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
