1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 12-07071 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robert S. Peters, Esquire 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On January 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 22, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 19, 2016. The Government offered 
     08/23/2016
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into 
evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 27, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in business. He has 
been employed at the same job with a federal contractor since 1985s. Before then he 
was a police officer for two years. He was married from 1993 to 2012 and has two 
daughters ages 16 and 18.2  
 
 Applicant became separated from his wife in 2009 and was going through a child 
custody dispute. Their marriage and separation was contentious. He had concerns over 
his wife’s treatment of their children and was seeking full custody of the children. His ex-
wife has a bipolar disorder. Applicant testified she was abusive to him and the children.  
 
 Applicant was approached by woman X whom he was familiar with from his law 
enforcement employment and was aware of her past criminal record. She told Applicant 
she had derogatory information about Applicant’s ex-wife and her boyfriend that would 
be helpful to his divorce case. Woman X contacted Applicant on several occasions and 
provided him with information about his ex-wife. Soon, she began asking for money for 
the information. He admitted he should never have continued interacting with woman X 
and did not adequately consider the potential repercussions.3  
 
 On October 19, 2011, Applicant had gastric bypass surgery. He was recovering 
at home and in a great deal of pain. On October 25, 2011, woman X contacted him and 
told him she had some good information about his ex-wife, and it would cost him money 
to get it, but it was worth it. Applicant was not feeling well and declined her offer. She 
continued to call him and pressure him for money in exchange for the information. He 
continued to decline. During this time, he was seeing a counselor through his church for 
emotional support while he was going through his divorce. The counselor called him on 
October 25, 2011, to see if he was going to keep his scheduled appointment that night. 
Because he was unable to sleep, he decided to go see his counselor. He was in pain 
from the surgery and was taking a prescribed painkiller. He admitted he should not have 
driven after taking the painkiller. When he left his counseling appointment, he noticed he 
had three text messages from woman X, again asking him to meet her. She told him 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a copy of Department Counsel’s discovery letter to Applicant. 
 
2 Tr. 15. 
 
3 Tr. 24-35; GE 2, 3 
 
3 
 
 
she had photos of his wife taking drugs with her boyfriend. Applicant does not know why 
he agreed to meet her, but he did.4  
 
 Woman X told Applicant to meet her at a house. He arrived and was invited in. 
Applicant does not remember everything that happened, but recalled that there was a 
second woman at the house when he arrived. Both women asked Applicant what he 
wanted, and he responded that he wanted whatever woman X had obtained, referring to 
information about his ex-wife. After this verbal exchange, police officers who were in the 
closet, came out and arrested Applicant for soliciting a prostitute. Applicant told the 
police he was not at the house for sex. He said: “I just had gastric bypass. That would 
kill me. I’ve got intestines sewn to my new stomach.”5 He told the police he was there to 
obtain photos of his wife using drugs. Woman X denied telling Applicant she had 
photos. When Applicant was searched, his prescription painkillers were found, and he 
was also charged with possession of a controlled substance. This charge was later 
dismissed when he provided proof that he had a valid prescription.6  
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he never had sex with woman X either before the 
arrest or after the arrest. He has had no contact with woman X since his arrest in 2011.7 
 
 Applicant became aware that woman X had been charged with two driving under 
the influence offenses in a month and her probation had been revoked. After Applicant's 
arrest, she was released. He believes she lied so she could set him up in exchange for 
her release. Applicant’s arrest was publicized in the newspaper and his friends and 
family are aware of it. After his arrest, he self-reported the incident to his security 
manager on the same day.8 
 
 Applicant hired an attorney, who advised him that he could plead not guilty to the 
misdemeanor charge and he would win, but that the litigation would cost him ten 
thousand dollars because they would have to obtain cell phone records and text 
message records. In the alternative, he could plead no contest through a diversion 
program, and, if he stayed out of trouble for six months the charge would be dismissed 
and then expunged. He was advised if he did the later it would accomplish the same 
thing. Applicant pled no contest through the diversion program and the charge was 
dismissed. In July 2012 the charge was expunged.9  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 23-35. 
 
5 Tr. 32. 
 
6 Tr. 23-35; GE 2, 3. 
 
7 Tr. 34-36. 
 
8 Tr. 24-35; GE 3, 4. 
 
9 Tr. 35; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he did not meet woman X for sex or to break the 
law. He wanted information from her about his wife for his custody dispute. He does not 
believe he was thinking clearly. Applicant was born without an eye socket and had a 
tumor growing where his eye socket should be. Doctors removed the tumor, but it grows 
back every three to four years and must be surgically removed. He testified that he 
consulted his doctor and asked if the tumor could affect his brain and was told that it 
could cause confusion and memory problems. Applicant believed that the brain tumor 
may have had an effect on his interactions with woman X. He admitted he did not think 
through the interactions with her as clearly as he should have. He had surgery to 
remove the tumor on December 1, 2011, which was 36 days after he was arrested.10  
 
 Applicant was told by his doctor that after he had gastric bypass surgery having 
sex too soon after the surgery would likely kill him. Applicant testified that he was in too 
much pain to think of sex.11  
 
 Applicant was awarded full custody of his children in 2013. He provided 
numerous character letters describing him as honest, hardworking and trustworthy. He 
has served on the county school board and the county commission.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
10 GE 2, 3. 
 
11 GE 2, 3. 
  
12 Tr. 36-37; AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant pled no contest to the charge of patronizing a prostitute. The above 
disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating condition 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant provided compelling testimony that although he was charged and pled 
no contest to patronizing a prostitute, the evidence was unsubstantiated and from a 
source of questionable reliability. He followed his attorney’s advice in accepting the 
diversion program, rather than spending thousands of dollars to litigate the charge. 
Particularly compelling and credible is the unlikelihood that five days after having major 
gastric bypass surgery, while on painkillers and having been advised by his doctor of 
the life threatening dangers of engaging in sex soon after surgery that he would 
patronize a prostitute. Also persuasive was woman X’s repeated badgering of Applicant 
to meet her, given her pending criminal charges, and Applicant’s interest in obtaining 
information for the child custody dispute. AG ¶ 17(f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is 60 years old. He was arrested and charged with possession of a 
controlled substance and patronizing a prostitute. The drug charge was dismissed 
because he had a valid prescription due to his recent surgery. He provided compelling 
evidence that he did not commit any offense. He pled no contest to save the cost of a 
trial and the charge has been expunged. Overall, the record evidence does not leave 
me with any questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
