 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09730 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 3, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on August 28, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on September 10, 2015. He responded with documents that I have 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C. The case was assigned to me on April 
22, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A through C are 
admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor since about January 2012. He was 
scheduled to graduate college in May 2016. As of 2012, which is the most recent 
information available, Applicant was unmarried without children.1  
 
Applicant has had financial problems for several years, which he attributed to 
being young and helping his parents financially. He also had extended periods of 
unemployment and underemployment before securing his current job.2 
 
Applicant did not file his federal income tax return for 2011 until July 2015. There 
is no evidence that Applicant ever filed a state tax return for 2011. However, he was not 
required to file the returns because his adjusted gross income was only $8,284.3 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file his state tax return for 2011 and nine 
delinquent debts totaling about $13,250. Applicant admitted owing all the debts with the 
exception of the $1,165 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and the $450 credit-card 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. All of the debts alleged in the SOR are listed on a March 
2012 credit report, an August 2014 credit report, or both credit reports. The $450 credit-
card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is listed on the March 2012 combined credit report, but 
not the August 2014 credit report.4 
 
Applicant discussed his finances when he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in May 2012. He admitted to the investigator that he owed the $5,417 
credit-union debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. He stated that he was unaware of the remaining 
accounts from the March 2012 credit report. He stated that he would take steps to have 
the accounts that did not belong to him removed from his credit report, and he would 
establish payment plans for any accounts that did belong to him. He estimated the 
accounts would be paid in 2013 or 2014.5 
 
Applicant did not pay any of the debts alleged in the SOR. In his July 2015 
response to the SOR, he indicated that he contracted with a credit counseling company 
and entered into a debt management program. He also received financial counseling 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4.  
 
2 Items 3, 4.  
 
3 Items 2, 4; AE B, C. See https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/p501--2011.pdf.   
 
4 Items 2, 5, 6.  
 
5 Item 4.  
 
3 
 
from the company. The company confirmed in December 2015 that Applicant was in the 
company’s debt management program. Applicant stated that the debts would be 
resolved through that program. He stated that the two debts he denied would be 
disputed by the company and included in the debt management program if validated.6 
Additional information about Applicant’s participation in the plan was not provided. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
6 Item 2; AE A.  
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Because of his low income, Applicant was not required to file a state income tax 
return for 2011. AG ¶ 19(g) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to being young and helping his parents 
financially. He also had extended periods of unemployment and underemployment 
before securing his current job. He has known that his finances were an issue since his 
background interview in May 2012, but he has not paid any of the debts alleged in the 
SOR. He contracted with a credit counseling company and entered into a debt 
management program. However, there was no additional evidence provided. The 
Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute 
for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case 
No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 
(App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
Applicant has a plan to resolve his financial problems, but he has not taken 
significant action to implement that plan. I am unable to find that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) (financial 
counseling) is applicable; the second section (clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the disputed 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h. I find that financial considerations concerns 
remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.j:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
