 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-09900 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Philip D. Cave, Esq. 
 
 
 
_____________ 
 
Decision 
_____________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence was insufficient to mitigate security concerns raised by 
three alcohol-related arrests over an eight-year period. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the alcohol consumption and personal conduct guidelines.1 On 
September 22, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish 
his eligibility for continued access to classified information. (Answer)  
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 On March 16, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice scheduling the hearing for April 21, 2016.2 The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 6. Applicant 
testified, called his former program manager as a witness, and offered Applicant’s 
exhibits (Ax.) 1 – 3. All the exhibits were admitted into the record without objection. The 
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received by DOHA on May 2, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, has been with his current employer since 2011. He has held a 
security clearance since 2002. In his Answer, Applicant notes he is an Eagle Scout and 
several of his family members have served in the U.S. military and government. His 
former program manager testified about his favorable opinion regarding Applicant’s 
honesty, reliability, and work performance. (Tr. 10-22) Numerous individuals submitted 
letters providing their favorable opinions of Applicant’s character and work as a 
Government contractor. (Ax. 1) His performance evaluations reflect that Applicant 
generally exceeds the expectations of his position. (Ax. 2.E) 
 
Between 1999 and 2011, Applicant had several alcohol-related incidents. He 
received substance abuse counseling or treatment in 2003, 2008, and 2010. He was 
diagnosed with alcohol dependency, relapsed on several occasions, and resided in a 
sober living house for several years before recently purchasing a home. He has not 
been involved in an alcohol-related incident since August 2011. Specifically, the record 
reflects the following alcohol-related incidents: 
 
1. In June 1999, Applicant attended a concert, got drunk, and was arrested for 
public intoxication. He was issued a citation and paid the fine. 
 
2. In June 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving or attempting 
to drive a vehicle while intoxicated. At hearing, Applicant acknowledged that 
he had been drinking heavily before driving his car. He was stopped by police 
and his blood alcohol content (BAC) measured above the legal limit to drive. 
He pled guilty to the DWI charge, but received probation before judgment. He 
was placed on probation for two years and ordered to attend a six-month 
alcohol treatment program, which he completed.  
 
3. In August 2008, Applicant was stopped for speeding and subsequently 
arrested for DWI. His BAC was measured at a .20. He pled guilty to the DWI 
charge. He received a sentence of four months in jail (most of which was 
suspended) and was placed on supervised probation for two years. He was 
ordered to install an interlock device on his car while on probation. Applicant 
complied with the terms of his sentence. 
 
4. In 2010, Applicant was fired by his former employer because of attendance 
issues related to his excessive alcohol consumption. He was going through 
                                                          
2 Prehearing scheduling correspondence, the notice of hearing, and case management order are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 
 
outpatient alcohol counseling and treatment before being fired. After being 
fired, Applicant received intensive substance abuse treatment. He last 
received substance abuse counseling or treatment in the fall of 2010, 
receiving a diagnosis of alcohol dependence, with a fair prognosis upon being 
discharged. 
 
5. In August 2011, after being involved in a minor traffic accident, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI). Applicant had 
been drinking with a childhood friend the night before and after sleeping for 
several hours, they decided to go bowling. On the way to the bowling alley, 
Applicant rear-ended another car. When police arrived, Applicant was 
administered a field sobriety test and was then asked to take a breathalyzer. 
He refused the breathalyzer, and was arrested and charged with DUI.  
 
Applicant voluntarily installed an alcohol interlock device on his car following the 
arrest. The prosecutor elected not to pursue the case and the DUI charge was 
dismissed. As of the date of the hearing, Applicant maintained an interlock device on his 
car. He stopped associating with the friend who he drank with before the arrest.  
 
After the August 2011 DUI arrest, Applicant did not drink alcohol for about six 
months. He consumed alcohol, including after being diagnosed alcohol dependent and 
advised not to drink alcohol. While a resident at the sober living house from September 
2010 to January 2015, Applicant consumed alcohol. He drank outside the home and did 
not tell his landlord. (His former landlord was one of the individuals who provided a 
character reference letter.) Applicant testified that he stopped drinking alcohol about five 
months before his security clearance hearing. (Tr. 46-51, 58-65; Ax. 1.A; Ax. 2.B) 
 
Applicant did not report the 2011 arrest to his employer or facility security officer 
(FSO). His former program manager testified that employees are required to report this 
type of adverse information up the chain-of-command and, in due course, he would 
have been notified of the adverse information. Applicant did not report the 2011 DUI 
arrest to his former program manager. The program manager was unaware of the 2011 
DUI arrest until he was on the stand testifying.3 (Tr. 20-22) 
 
Applicant acknowledges that he did not report the 2011 DUI arrest to his FSO. 
He claims that he was unaware of his employer’s reporting requirements. He knew that 
his periodic background reinvestigation would take place in 2012, and the adverse 
information would have to be reported at that time.4 (Tr. 36)  
                                                          
3 Applicant’s witness had just been asked:  “And I know you’ve been asked about this, but do you think, in 
your opinion, is [Applicant] a truthful person, honest, in that sense?” And, responded: “He absolutely is. I 
mean, he absolutely is. I don’t hesitate, I can’t think of a reason or an instance when he did not tell me the 
truth, or we had any kind of incident where he would need to not tell me the truth, I guess, if that helps.” 
(Tr. 17) 
 
4 Applicant’s failure to report the adverse information about his 2011 DUI arrest to his FSO and the 2010 
alcohol-related job termination were not alleged in the SOR. These matters were not considered as 
disqualifying, but were considered in assessing Applicant’s mitigation case, claim of rehabilitation, 
credibility, and whole-person factors.  
 
4 
 
In March 2012, Applicant filled out and submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA) as part of the reinvestigation process. He listed the 2008 DWI conviction, 2010 
job termination, 2011 DUI arrest, and substance abuse counseling and treatment he 
received. He discussed these matters and his history of alcohol abuse with a 
background investigator. He responded to a detailed alcohol interrogatory sent to him 
by the DOD CAF. He provided counseling and treatment records with his response.  
 
As of July 30, 2015, when Applicant signed the interrogatory response, he was 
consuming alcohol, usually in social settings with family and close friends. Applicant 
estimated that in these social settings he would usually consume “around 4-6 beers.” 
He went on to state that he did not “currently” drink to the “point of intoxication,” and that 
“over six months” had passed since he had last become intoxicated. He noted that he 
intended to continue to drink alcohol, since he had been responsibly managing his 
alcohol consumption over the past few years. (Gx. 3 at 2-3) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged his alcohol problem and stated that he is 
alcohol dependent. He reported last consuming alcohol nearly five months earlier on 
New Year’s Eve, and claimed that since that date he had abstained from drinking 
alcohol. (Tr. 23-24) He stopped drinking alcohol because of health and economic 
concerns. He used to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) when he was a resident at the 
sober living house, but then stopped. He restarted attending AA in February 2016. He 
tries to attend two to three AA meetings a week. He testified that he has received AA 
coins in the past for remaining sober and the longest period of time he had remained 
sober was about six months. (Tr. 63) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
 
5 
 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the paramount importance of protecting national security in all 
suitability determinations, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern regarding an applicant with a history of excessive alcohol 
consumption is articulated at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s three alcohol-related arrests between 2003 and 2008, repeated 
relapses after receiving court-mandated alcohol counseling or therapy, and diagnosis of 
alcohol dependence raise the overall Guideline G concern and the following 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence . . . regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
AG ¶ 22(c):  habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
AG ¶ 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and  
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 22(f):  relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 An applicant may mitigate the excessive alcohol consumption concern by 
establishing one or more of the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 23(b):  the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues 
of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
AG ¶ 23(c):  the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and 
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident was five years ago. In the intervening 
years, he has resided in a sober living house, accumulated a good employment record, 
and purchased a home. Notwithstanding, full application of AG ¶¶ 23(a) – 23(d) are not 
warranted. Applicant’s three alcohol-related arrests were separated by five years 
between his first and second DUI arrest and three years between his second and third 
alcohol-related arrest. Applicant’s history of committing alcohol-related criminal offenses 
after long stretches of time undercuts the mitigating value of the passage of time since 
his last alcohol-related arrest.  
 
 Furthermore, the mitigating value of Applicant’s residence in the sober living 
house is minimal, at best. Applicant continued to drink alcohol during his time at the 
sober living residence in apparent violation of house rules and the purpose behind his 
residence at the house. He apparently was able to hide his problem drinking, except for 
the 2011 DUI arrest, from the individual who was in charge of the house. This evidence 
raises concerns about Applicant’s ability to follow rules and regulations when it comes in 
conflict with his desire to consume alcohol.  
 
 
7 
 
 Moreover, the good employment record Applicant has been able to garner in the 
past five years came after he failed to report the 2011 DUI arrest. This arrest came early 
on in his tenure with his current employer and after he had been fired by his former 
employer for alcohol-related absence issues. Applicant’s claim that he was not aware of 
his employer’s adverse information reporting requirement was not credible. His 
subsequent disclosures during the course of the current background investigation do 
not fully mitigate concerns raised by his initial failure to report the adverse information to 
his employer. Applicant was required to answer the pointed alcohol-related questions on 
the SCA and follow-up questions posed by the background investigator and the DOD 
CAF. However, clearance holders are held to a higher standard and are expected to 
report adverse information at the time it occurs not just when they are specifically asked 
about the topic. Otherwise, concerns arise that if a security violation or other security-
significant issue arises Applicant may not self-report the matter.  
 
 Applicant’s installation and maintenance of an interlock device, and recent period 
of sobriety and AA attendance receive minimal mitigation value. The timing of when 
Applicant took these actions strongly suggests that they were primarily motivated by a 
desire to avoid criminal prosecution and improve his prospects of being awarded a 
security clearance. Applicant’s acknowledgment at hearing that he has an alcohol 
problem appeared sincere, but he has never gone more than six months sober before 
resuming his alcohol consumption. He has resumed consuming alcohol after multiple 
arrests, job loss, and being advised on multiple occasions by professional substance 
abuse counselors or therapists to abstain from alcohol use due to his condition.  
 
 Applicant’s receipt of a favorable prognosis after his latest substance abuse 
treatment was undermined by his conduct just a year later when he decided to drink and 
drive. He has not received any further counseling or therapy since 2010, nor provided 
an updated evaluation. Consequently, although AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), and 23(d) are all 
partially applicable, they are insufficient to mitigate the Guideline G security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related arrests and continued drinking after being diagnosed 
as alcohol dependent and advised to refrain from drinking alcohol were cross-alleged in 
the SOR under Guideline E. As more fully explained above, Applicant’s alcohol-related 
arrests and refusal for years to acknowledge the professional medical advice of his 
counselors and therapist raise serious questions about his judgment, ability to follow 
rules and regulations, and other essential traits required of clearance holders. I 
 
8 
 
specifically found the personal conduct disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 16(c) 
through 16(e) fully apply and the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 17(c) through 
17(e) partially apply for similar reasons noted above under the Guideline G analysis. 
Also for similar reasons, I find that Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the 
personal conduct security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).5 I incorporate my (excessive) alcohol consumption and 
personal conduct analysis and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s good employment record, community 
involvement through the Boy Scouts, favorable character references, and the honesty 
he showed in disclosing the adverse information from the point in time he filled out and 
submitted his SCA through the submission of his DOD CAF interrogatory responses. 
However, security clearance determinations require a judge to make predictive 
judgments regarding a person’s security clearance suitability based on that person’s 
past history and present circumstances. Furthermore, as the protection of national 
security is the paramount concern, any doubt regarding a person’s suitability raised by 
the evidence must result in an adverse determination.  
 
 After considering all the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, Applicant’s 
alcohol-related issues continue to raise doubt about his suitability and eligibility for 
access to classified information. Hopefully, he will continue on his current path of 
recovery and be able to reestablish his eligibility in the near future. However, at this 
time, the record evidence does not support a favorable finding. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d, and 1.i:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.h:         For Applicant6 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 These allegations reference Applicant’s substance abuse treatment, which do not raise a security 
concern. Instead, it is Applicant’s repeated relapses after receiving treatment and being advised not to 
drink alcohol due to his diagnosed condition (alcohol dependent), which is listed as a concern in SOR 1.i, 
that raise a concern. Accordingly, as SOR 1.e – 1.h reference the same or similar security concern in 
SOR 1.i, these other allegations are decided in Applicant’s favor.  
