 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09594 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his accumulation of a 
substantial amount of delinquent debt and failure to file his tax returns. Notwithstanding 
the presence of some favorable information, Applicant failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion for access to classified information. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his 
eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On March 16, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice scheduling Applicant’s hearing for April 26, 2016.2 The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.) A – E. Both sides’ exhibits were admitted 
without objection.3 At Applicant’s request, I kept the record open post-hearing to provide 
him the opportunity to submit additional evidence. He did not submit evidence post-
hearing.4 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received by DOHA on May 5, 2016, and the 
record closed on May 13, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 39, graduated from college with a business management degree in 
2006. He was able to secure employment with a financial institution for a short period of 
time, but was primarily unemployed or underemployed from approximately 2007 to June 
2011. He decided to change careers to improve his marketability and started taking 
computer-related courses. (Tr. 27-28; Gx. 1 - 2) 
 
Applicant has been with his current employer since June 2011. He is employed 
as a network administrator. He earned a starting annual salary of $90,000 and, as of the 
hearing, his yearly salary had increased to $120,000. He is engaged and his fiancée 
contributes to their household expenses. Applicant estimates that, after paying 
expenses and debts, he has about $3,000 a month in disposable income. (Tr. 33-35)  
 
 Applicant incurred a significant amount of delinquent debt during the four-year 
period of time that he was unemployed and underemployed. He became overwhelmed 
with the amount of debt and pushed it aside. Applicant claims that after getting his 
current job and recognizing the need to attain a security clearance for the job, he began 
the process of addressing his financial situation. (Tr. 28) 
 
In March 2012, in connection with his employment as a federal contractor, 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In response to questions 
regarding his financial record, Applicant disclosed a number of delinquent debts, 
including the student loan debts referenced in SOR 1.a and 1.b. He stated on the SCA 
that he was working with a credit counselor to consolidate his outstanding student loans 
and “bring them back to current status.” (Gx. 1 at 40) He took no documented action to 
remedy his student loan delinquency in the four years that elapsed between submitting 
his SCA and his security clearance hearing. Instead, at hearing, Applicant claimed that 
he was working with a new credit counselor to resolve his debts, including his 
                                                          
2 Prehearing scheduling correspondence, the notice of hearing, and case management order are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively. 
  
3 Department Counsel sent Applicant the exhibits she offered at hearing in December 2015. (Gx. 5). 
Applicant confirmed he received the Government’s exhibits in advance of the hearing. (Tr. 9-13, 22-23) 
 
4 Inquiry to the parties regarding whether Applicant submitted post-hearing matters and Department 
Counsel’s response noting that she did not receive any from Applicant are attached to the record as Hx. 
IV. See also Tr. 60-62 (deadline for submitting post-hearing matters established).  
 
3 
 
 
delinquent student loans. (Tr. 45-47) Applicant claimed that he contacted the creditor 
servicing his student loans and was offered a payment plan of $600-$700 a month, but 
that it “wasn’t a feasible payment plan.” (Tr. 40) Applicant’s delinquent student loans, 
which total over $50,000, remain unaddressed.  
 
 The other delinquent debts referenced at SOR 1.c – 1.s were listed by Applicant 
on his SCA or uncovered during the course of the subsequent background investigation. 
(Gx. 1 – 4) In April 2012, during his background interview, Applicant stated that he 
planned to meet with a credit counselor, investigate the derogatory accounts appearing 
on his credit report, and address those delinquent debts he owed. (Gx. 2 at 7) At 
hearing, Applicant admitted, in response to questions by Department Counsel, that he 
took no action to address his delinquent debts until the SOR was issued. (Tr. 59)  
 
Applicant also claimed at hearing, as he had in his sworn Answer, that he had 
paid a number of the smaller debts listed on the SOR. The record was kept open for two 
weeks to provide him the opportunity to provide documentation to corroborate his 
claims. He did not submit any matters post-hearing. (Tr. 48-56, 60-62) 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2009 federal and state tax returns. He stated on his SCA 
that he had hired a nationally well-known tax preparation firm to file his overdue returns. 
(Gx. 1 at 32-33)5 During his subsequent background interview, Applicant discussed his 
overdue 2009 tax returns and told the investigator that he planned to file the 2009 
returns in April 2012. (Gx. 2 at 1) Four years later, at his security clearance hearing, in 
response to Department Counsel’s questions, Applicant admitted he had not yet filed 
his 2009 tax returns. He did not have a “good answer” for why he had not taken action 
to address his tax situation. (Tr. at 56-57) 
 
 Applicant claims that he has been unable to resolve his delinquent debts 
because he is uncertain as to the accuracy of the adverse information reflected on his 
credit reports. He provided documentation reflecting that his personal information was 
potentially compromised. (Ax. B) He hired credit counselors to assist him in verifying the 
derogatory accounts listed on his credit reports. For instance, after the SOR was issued, 
Applicant filed a dispute regarding the $7,500 collection account for past-due rent 
referenced in SOR 1.c. After receiving a response from the credit bureaus verifying the 
debt, Applicant took no action to address the debt. (Tr. 47-48) He provided no additional 
documentation to substantiate his dispute regarding the specific debts listed in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s evaluation reports reflect good work performance. He is highly 
regarded by his references for his professionalism and trustworthiness. (Ax. D and E) 
 
                                                          
5 See also February 24, 2015 sworn Answer, wherein Applicant states he is working with the same tax 
preparation firm to file his 2009 tax returns and promises to do so by the hearing. As noted, as of the 
hearing, which was held over a year later, Applicant had not filed his 2009 tax returns.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an individual with financial problems might be tempted to compromise 
classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses 
the extent to which an individual’s delinquent debts cast doubt upon their judgment, self-
control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.6 
 
Applicant’s accumulation of a significant amount of delinquent debt and failure to 
file his 2009 income tax returns raise the financial considerations security concern. This 
record evidence also establishes the following disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
 The guideline lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the financial 
considerations security concern. I considered all the mitigating conditions, including the 
following: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s current financial problems 
are, in part, related to long-term unemployment and underemployment. However, 
despite full-time employment since June 2011, Applicant has not taken responsible 
action to address his delinquent debts and tax situation. Instead, time and again, over 
the course of the security clearance process, Applicant has made hollow promises to 
address his debts and overdue tax returns. Regarding his past-due debts, Applicant’s 
action has been limited to hiring credit verification firms to contest the derogatory 
accounts listed on his credit report and, if the credit agencies verify the debt, he takes 
no further action to address the debt beyond filing another dispute.7 As of the close of 
the record, the 18 SOR debts, which total about $65,000 and include numerous debts of 
less than $500 each, remain unaddressed. As for the overdue tax returns, 
notwithstanding repeated promises to file the returns, Applicant has yet to file them. In 
short, the record strongly suggests that Applicant is attempting to evade his financial 
obligations, raising concerns he may treat his security obligations in a similar fashion.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.8 Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof. 
Financial considerations security concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
8 It is generally well recognized that it make take an individual years to clean up incorrect information 
appearing on their credit report due to identity theft. However, in this case, the record evidence does not 
support a finding that Applicant’s financial situation is related to identity theft. Instead, the record reflects 
an individual who has disregarded his financial obligations for years despite the financial means to 
address them. 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I have considered all the record evidence, including 
Applicant’s good work performance and favorable character references. 
Notwithstanding this and other favorable record evidence, Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of proof for access to classified information. Notwithstanding full-time 
employment since June 2011 and reported $3,000 a month in disposable income, he 
has yet to take action to address his delinquent debts and overdue tax filings. He was 
first made aware that these matters raised a security concern over four years ago. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about his present suitability and 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
