1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-08907 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 28, 2012. On June 
16, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. 
The DOD CAF acted under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, 
Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 18, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 13, 
2016, and the case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016. On May 12, 2016, the Defense 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 7, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but 
did not submit the testimony of any other witnesses or any documentary evidence. I 
kept the record open until July 11, 2016, to enable him to submit documentary 
evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 15, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations except SOR ¶ 
1.f, which he denied.2 His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old quality control inspector employed by a defense 
contractor. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from June 1979 to June 1999, 
and retired as a petty officer second class (pay grade E-5), with an honorable 
discharge. He worked for a non-federal employer from August 1999 to August 2011, 
when he was laid off. He began working for his current employer in December 2011. He 
held a security clearance while in the Navy, and he has an active security clearance. 
(Tr. 19.)  
 
 Applicant married in June 1983 and divorced in December 1989. He married his 
current spouse in April 1992. He has three adult children. 
 
 When Applicant was laid off in August 2011, he was earning about $63,000 per 
year. When he started working for his current employer, he earned about $40,000 per 
year. He now earns about $51,200 per year. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
Applicant’s wife is a home daycare provider, earning about $50,000 per year. (Tr. 
23-25, 40-41.) She manages the family finances. (Tr. 26.) Applicant estimates that they 
have a net monthly remainder, after paying all living expenses, of about $300 or $400. 
(Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) from April 2012 (GX 2), October 2014 
(GX 3), and May 2015 (GX 4) reflect the ten delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling about $27,722. The status of the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, collection account for $5,039. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that he sent a $50 payment to this creditor in June 2014, but he lost contact with 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
2 Applicant wrote “I admit” next to SOR ¶ 1.f on a copy of the SOR, but he denied it in his narrative 
answer.  
3 
 
the creditor, who sent all correspondence to his son, and his son ignored the 
correspondence. Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence of the $50 
payment. After the hearing, he submitted evidence that he had made a payment 
agreement providing for monthly $50 payments and had made the agreed payments in 
March, April and May 2016. (AX B.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, collection account for $2,750. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that correspondence about this debt also was missent to his son, and that he had 
agreed to begin monthly payments in July 2015. He did not submit any evidence of 
payments with his answer or at the hearing. After the hearing, he submitted evidence 
that he had agreed to make monthly $25 payments and had made the payments in 
March, April, and May 2016. (AX A.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, collection account for $2,464. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that the actual balance on this debt was $1,267, and that he had arranged to 
have monthly payments deducted from his bank account starting in August 2015. He did 
not submit any documentary evidence of payments or a payment plan. At the hearing, 
Applicant testified that he knew nothing about this debt. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, charged-off debt to home improvement store for $484. Applicant 
testified that he believed this debt was included in the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he 
submitted no documentary evidence to support his belief. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, charged-off credit card for $1,737. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that he had arranged to make automatic payments on the debt 
beginning in August 2015. He submitted no documentary evidence of payments or a 
payment plan. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he did not recognize this debt. (Tr. 
34.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f, charged-off department store account for $737. In his answer to 
the SOR, Applicant denied this debt, stating that it was his wife’s debt. However, his 
answer also included documentary evidence of monthly $81 payments on this debt from 
May 2015 to March 2016. After the hearing, he submitted evidence of an agreement to 
pay $50 per month beginning in June 2016. (AX C.) He did not explain the discrepancy 
between the two payment plans. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g, charged-off credit card for $1,411. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted this debt, but he stated that he could not identify who currently 
owned it. At the hearing, he testified that he had done nothing to track down the owner 
of this debt. (Tr. 36.) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.h, charged-off electronics store account for $2,400. After the 
hearing, Applicant submitted evidence that this debt is included in the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. (AX A.) 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i, charged-off department store account for $1,859. At the hearing, 
Applicant admitted that he had done nothing to resolve this debt. (Tr. 37-38.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j, charged-off credit card for $9,841. Applicant’s answer to SOR 
included documentation that payments in an unknown amount are being made and the 
balance has been reduced to $2,474. His documentation is mislabeled, erroneously 
indicating that it applies to SOR ¶ 1.i instead of this debt. 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he and his wife owe about $16,000 in 
federal income taxes. The debt arose because they have not had enough taxes 
withheld since 2010. (Tr. 45.) He testified that they are paying $500 per month pursuant 
to a payment plan. (Tr. 46.) He submitted no documentation to support his testimony. 
The tax debt is not alleged in the SOR.3 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
3 The tax debt may not be an independent basis for an adverse decision regarding Applicant’s security 
clearance, because it was not alleged in the SOR. However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be 
considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is 
applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the evidence of Applicant’s tax 
debt for these limited purposes. 
 
5 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
6 
 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The evidence shows that SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h are the same debt. Applicant 
claimed that SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d allege the same debt, but he did not submit evidence 
supporting his claim. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) (same debt alleged 
twice). Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.h is resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR, his testimony at the hearing, 
and CBRs establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and were 
not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s short period of unemployment after 
being laid off from his previous job, his substantial pay reduction when he began his 
current job, and the misrouting of correspondence from his creditors were 
circumstances largely beyond his control. However, he has not acted responsibly. He 
was aware that his financial problems were a security concern when he submitted his 
7 
 
security clearance application in March 2012. Both he and his wife have been gainfully 
employed since he submitted his application, and their annual family income is more 
than $100,000. Applicant began making payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f 
before he received the SOR. However, he took no significant actions to resolve the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 1.g-1.i until he received the SOR. He claimed that he 
made a $50 payment on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a in June 2014, before he received the 
SOR, but he submitted no documentation of the payment.  
 
 Applicant’s testimony at the hearing demonstrated that he has been remarkably 
uninvolved in his financial affairs, relying on his wife to manage their money and resolve 
any problems. At the hearing, he could not explain the status of several debts, even 
though he commented on them in detail in his answer to the SOR, suggesting that his 
answer to the SOR was authored in large part by his wife.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not received financial counseling, 
and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.j, but not for 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 1.g-1.i. This mitigating condition requires a 
showing of a good-faith effort to resolve financial problems. “Good faith” means acting in 
a way that shows, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past 
irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts motivated by the pressure of 
qualifying for a security clearance. Except for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.j, Applicant 
took no significant actions to resolve his delinquent debts until he received the SOR, 
strongly suggesting that the actions that he took were motivated by concern for 
protecting his security clearance rather than a sense of duty or obligation. As of the date 
the record closed, Applicant had taken no actions to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g 
and 1.i. He claimed to have made payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e, but 
he submitted no documentation to support his claim.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) Thus, Applicant’s recent payments on the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.h (which is included in 1.a), which were made after he 
received the SOR and motivated by his concern for protecting his security clearance, 
are insufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by them. Although Applicant’s 
documentation does not reflect the amounts of payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.j, the substantial reduction in the balance due indicates that the payments 
commenced before Applicant received the SOR.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any debts alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably for 20 years in the Navy, and he has held a 
clearance for many years, apparently without incident. He was sincere and candid at the 
hearing. However, he was remarkably ignorant about his financial situation at the 
hearing, even after being put on notice that his security clearance was in jeopardy.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
