 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11914 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 30, 2015. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-6 (Item 1 is the pleadings and transmittal 
information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant who received it on December 17, 
2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She timely submitted Applicant exhibits (AE) A (1-
11) and B. She did not object to any Government exhibits. Items 2-6 and AE A-B are all 
admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she neither admitted nor denied the 
allegations, but she provided explanations. Her answers will be taken as constructive 
denials. After a careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. She is married and has eight children. She has worked 
for a federal contractor since November 2003. She has bachelor’s degree. She has 
never served in the military.1  
  
 The SOR lists four delinquent debts totaling approximately $17,205, which 
includes a judgment to a state for delinquent student loans in the amount of $16,300. 
Applicant stated the reason for her financial difficulties was because her husband is a 
diabetic and is also a cancer patient who underwent chemotherapy 18 months ago. Her 
husband handled the family’s finances, but she had to take over because of his 
condition after not doing so for over 25 years.2  
 
 The debts are supported by a credit report from July 2012 and court documents 
supporting the judgment entered in September 2010. The status of the debts is as 
follows:3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (Judgment for defaulted student loans-$16,300): 
 
 Applicant acted as a guarantor/cosigner on her daughter’s student loans in 
September 2002. Her daughter apparently failed to make the required payments on the 
loan and the creditor sought payment from Applicant by filing a civil action. A default 
judgment was entered against Applicant in September 2010. As of March 8, 2016, the 
balance on the judgment was $28,932. Applicant recently contacted the judgment 
holder and paid $5,000 toward the judgment. She also set up a payment plan to pay 
$400 monthly beginning in April 2016. This debt is being resolved.4 
 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 3-5. 
 
3 Items 3-4. 
 
4 Item 3; AE A 3-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (consumer debt- $524): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation that this debt was charged off by the original 
creditor in 2012. The letter further states the current account status as “closed-balance 
paid in full.” This debt is resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c and ¶ 1.d (consumer debts- $57 and $324): 
 
 Applicant claims these debts were paid years ago. They do not appear on the 
two most recent credit reports. These debts are resolved.6 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about her current financial status or a 
budget. She claimed to have contacted a consumer credit assistance company, but she 
did not provide any details of the contact.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
5 AE A 11. 
 
6 Item 6; AE B. 
 
7 AE A 9. 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
Applicant had delinquent debts and the judgment remains unpaid or unresolved. I 
find the disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are resolved or are being resolved. She provided sufficient 
evidence to show that financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
Applicant’s husband’s medical condition was a circumstance beyond her control. She 
presented sufficient evidence to show responsible action to address the judgment 
entered against her in 2010. I find AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant presented no evidence 
of financial counseling. She presented evidence that the three small consumer debts 
are resolved and the large student loan judgment is being resolved. I find AG ¶¶ 20(d) 
and 20(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has shown a track record 
of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
