 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-12006  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
raised by her history of financial problems and her unresolved delinquent debts which 
are in excess of $37,000. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 27, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended her case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on December 3, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She 
received the FORM on January 7, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on March 14, 2016. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 5 through 10, and 12 without objection. GEs 4, 
11, 13 are excluded as explained below.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Ruling on Admissibility of Reports of Investigation (ROI) 
 
 GEs 4, 11, and 13 are ROIs summarizing the interview Applicant had with a 
background investigator in March 2014, May 2009, and August 2012, respectively. 
These interviews are not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. 
Footnotes 1 through 3 of the FORM advises Applicant of this fact and further cautions 
Applicant that if she fails to object to the admission of the interview summaries in her 
response to the FORM that her failure may be taken as a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, or specifically to footnotes 1 
through 3, does not demonstrate that she understands the concepts of authentication, 
or waiver and admissibility. It also does not establish that she understands the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, 
GEs 4, 11, and 13 are inadmissible and I have not considered them. 
 
Ruling on Proposed SOR Amendments 
 
 Also embedded in the FORM is a motion to amend the SOR. The amendment 
contains three sections. In section 1, Department Counsel moves to delete the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.h, 1.i, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.r. In section 2, Department Counsel 
moves to amend SOR allegations, 1.n and 1.q to correct clerical errors in each 
allegation. Specifically, Department Counsel seeks to change the creditor alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.n to conform to GE 6, a credit report dated February 20, 2014. Department 
Counsel seeks to amend SOR ¶ 1.q to reflect that Applicant filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection in May 2012, not May 2013 as alleged. The amendment’s 
proposed in sections 1 and 2 are granted. 
 
 In section 3, Department Counsel moves to add SOR ¶¶ 1.s through 1.z to reflect 
the unpaid accounts remaining after Applicant’s May 2012 bankruptcy petition was 
dismissed in October 2013. The amendments proposed in section 3 are denied. The 
allegations are unnecessarily cumulative. The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q, and 
the petition is included in the record as GE 8, putting Applicant on adequate notice that 
the Government has concerns about the debts included in the bankruptcy petition. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant, 51, has worked for a federal contractor since August 1990. According 
to Applicant’s January 2014 security clearance application, this is her first application. 
However, the Government’s Exhibits suggests that Applicant was also investigated for 
eligibility in in 2009 and 2012. On her January 2014 application, Applicant disclosed that 
she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in October 2013 and that she had a 
mortgage loan that was foreclosed in February 2012. The ensuing investigation also 
revealed that Applicant owed $37,846 on 11 delinquent accounts and that she has had 
financial problems since at least 2009.3  
 
 Applicant claims to have paid off the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b4 and to have 
offered settlement payments for the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.k, and 
1.m. However, she provided no documentation to corroborate her claims. Applicant 
admits SOR ¶ 1.q regarding her Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, which was discharged 
in October 2013. According to the trustee reports, the petition was dismissed for failure 
to make plan payments. Applicant claims that she became unable to make the 
payments after her husband was laid off from his job.  Applicant made payments under 
the plan from May 2012 to August 2013; the majority of the proceeds went to the 
mortgage on her current residence. At the time the petition was dismissed, none of the 
creditors received any distributions from the trustee. Applicant has not provided any 
evidence to suggest that the debts in the dismissed petition have been resolved.5 
 
  Applicant denies SOR ¶ 1.c, but provides no explanation for the basis of her 
dispute. She also denies owing SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.l, and 1.n because she claims the debts 
no longer appear on her credit report. The debts appear on the credit reports in the 
record and Applicant does not explain why she is relieved of her responsibility to pay 
them.6   
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
3 GE 3, 5-10, 12. 
 
4 SOR ¶ 1.j appears to be a duplicate of the account alleged in 1.b. Accordingly, SOR 1.j is decided in 
Applicant’s favor.  
 
5 GE 2, 8.  
 
6 GE 2.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”7  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $37,846 in delinquent accounts and that 
she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in May 2012, which was ultimately 
dismissed in October 2013 for failure to make plan payments. The record supports a 
prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial obligations and 
that she has demonstrated an inability to do so.8 Applicant failed to present evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns. Although she claims to have resolved several of the 
debts, she failed to provide any corroborating documentation. She also failed to present 
a legitimate basis for disputing the accounts she denies or claims that she no longer 
owes. Furthermore, given that Applicant has failed to provide any information about the 
status of the debts in her dismissed bankruptcy petition and her financial problems 
appear to be ongoing.  
 
After reviewing the record, I conclude that doubts remain about Applicant’s 
security worthiness. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2. In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely 
on the written record. In doing so, however, she failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her 
circumstances, articulate her position, mitigate the financial concerns, or establish 
                                                          
7  AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
 
5 
 
evidence of financial rehabilitation and reform. The security concerns raised in the SOR 
remain. Following Egan9 and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in 
favor of protecting national security.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a, 1.h, 1.i. 1.o. 1.p, 1.r:  Withdrawn 
 
 Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.g, 1.j – n, 1.q:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
