 
1 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-11299 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 15, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 18, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 18, 2015. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 11, 2015, and requested a hearing. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on August 7, 2015. The case was assigned to a different 
administrative judge on August 17, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
 
 
(DOHA) issued the first Notice of Hearing on September 8, 2015, for a hearing 
scheduled for September 24, 2015. Applicant did not appear at that hearing and did not 
give notice of his absence. A brief transcript of that proceeding was made and received 
by DOHA.  
 
On September 29, 2015, Applicant sent an email to the Department Counsel and 
the previously detailed judge explaining why he did not appear as scheduled. He 
claimed he was ill and also missed work that day. On October 2, 2015, an order was 
issued continuing the hearing to another date.  
 
The case was transferred to me on November 10, 2015. DOHA issued a second 
Notice of Hearing on November 18, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 10, 2015. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 17, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.h through 1.l of the SOR, with explanations. He denied 
the factual allegations in Subparagraphs 1.c to1.g of the SOR. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He works for a defense contractor. He has been 
married and divorced three times, and remarried and divorced his third wife a second 
time. He has four children, the oldest being adults and his youngest an 11-year-old who 
lives with him. Applicant must send her to visit her mother in another state at least 
monthly and he claims the costs of those flights consumes some of his monthly income. 
He is accumulating money in his checking account to pay for a lawyer to seek 
modifications of his custody agreements for his daughter. He is also accumulating 
money with which to pay for a bankruptcy filing in 2016. (Tr. 12-16, 29, 37; Exhibits 1, 2, 
6, 7) 
 
 The SOR lists 12 delinquent debts owed to credit card companies, cell telephone 
companies, and a former landlord. These debts total $55,632. Applicant has not 
resolved any of them. He admits the eight large credit card debts and denies the four 
smaller debts. Applicant has not done anything to resolve the debts in at least six years. 
He testified that in 2008 he turned over some of the debts to a debt resolution company 
and paid it $600 to start the process of getting his debts resolved. He has not heard 
anything from that company since 2010, when he discovered the phone number he had 
for it was disconnected. (Tr. 19-28, 33, 35, 36; Exhibits 3-7) 
 
 Applicant’s three exhibits pertain to a debt that is not listed on the SOR. It is a 
debt owed to a bank. The exhibits refer to a settlement offer in 2008. The payment 
 
3 
 
 
status of that debt is unknown because there is no evidence Applicant paid money 
according to the settlement installment payment arrangement. (Tr. 30; Exhibits A-C) 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant had any financial counseling designed to resolve 
his delinquent debts. His only action was to retain that debt resolution company that did 
not resolve his debts. (Tr. 19-35; Exhibits 1-7) 
 
 Applicant answered Section 26 on the e-QIP in the negative as regards debts 
turned over to a collection agency in the previous seven years, which would have taken 
his relevant debt period back to 2005. Applicant claims he pushed everything out of his 
head in 2012 regarding his debts because he turned them over to the debt resolution 
company and was making payments. He also had other concerns relating to his 
divorces and children. He stated, “I just really didn’t think about it.” Applicant only 
resolved one debt through the debt resolution company, that which is the subject of his 
exhibits and not listed in the SOR. (Tr. 33, 34; Exhibits 1-7)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $55,632 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. Applicant has 12 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The evidence 
raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. As more fully herein, none of the following 
mitigating conditions are applicable:   
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s debt delinquencies continue to the present day. There are no unusual 
circumstances and they continue to recur because they are unpaid. AG ¶ 20 (a) is not 
established. 
 
The delinquent debts were not beyond Applicant’s control. He entered into the 
debts voluntarily. He has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20 (b) is 
not established.  
  
Applicant is not paying his debts in an orderly manner currently. He has not had 
any financial counseling. He retained a debt resolution company in 2008 to resolve his 
debts but it took action on one debt. Applicant has not had contact with that company 
since 2010. The financial problem of the unresolved debts is not under control. AG ¶ 20 
(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant has not repaid the 12 debts listed in the SOR. AG ¶ 20 (d) is not 
established because Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to repay the delinquent 
SOR debts.  
 
Applicant has not shown a reasonable basis to dispute any or all of the three 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20 (e) is not established.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has no affluence that comes from a legal source and it is not an issue 
in his proceeding. AG ¶ 20 (f) is not established.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admits he did not disclose his 12 debts on his e-QIP nor did he 
disclose and discuss them with the government investigator until confronted with them 
at the interview after he completed the e-QIP. He deliberately did not disclose his 
delinquent debts on his e-QIP or to the government investigator. He testified he put 
them out of his mind because of other things and his having turned them over to the 
debt resolution company. Neither explanation is credible or persuasive. AG ¶ 16 (a) is 
established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None of 
them apply: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
7 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 Applicant deliberately did not disclose his debts on the e-QIP in 2012. AG ¶ 17 
(a) is not established.  
 
 No person gave Applicant improper or inadequate advice concerning the security 
clearance process. AG ¶ 17 (b) is not established. 
 
 The debts are not minor. The failure to disclose them on the e-QIP shows his 
behavior is not infrequent. There are no unique circumstances involved. Applicant knew 
of the debts when he completed the e-QIP. AG ¶ 17 (c) is not established. 
 
 Applicant has not obtained counseling to change his behavior, including paying 
the debts. AG ¶ 17 (d) is not established. 
 
 Applicant has not taken any steps to reduce or eliminate any vulnerability 
because of the unpaid debts and his failure to disclose them when requested by the 
U.S. government on the e-QIP. AG ¶ 17 (e) is not established. 
 
 The information about Applicant’s delinquent debts is reliable and shown on 
three credit reports introduced as exhibits. AG ¶ 17 (f) is not established.  
 
 Finally, there is no allegation of association with persons involved in criminal 
activity, so AG ¶ 17 (g) is not applicable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant voluntarily incurred the 
debt that is now delinquent and has been for at least six years. He has done nothing to 
resolve the debts, even though he admits eight of the twelve debts. The remaining four 
debts appear on his credit reports and are his to pay. He shows a pattern of disregard 
for his duty to repay the borrowed money represented by the delinquent debts. There is 
no rehabilitation or permanent behavioral changes. The SOR debts total $55,935, which 
is a lot of money to owe and not repay to the creditors. Applicant admitted he ignored 
the debts for the past six years after he could not reestablish contact with the debt 
resolution company.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
and personal conduct.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
