The record  consists of the transcript (Tr.) and Government exhibits (GE) 1-4.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
      )
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX    )      ISCR Case No. 12-10172
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel
David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 26 January 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 18
August 2015, and I convened a hearing 30 September 2015. DOHA received the
transcript (Tr.) 8 October 2015.
2
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, and 1.i. He denied the remaining
allegations. He is a 27-year-old systems administrator employed as a defense
contractor since May 2012. He has not previously held a clearance. Since leaving
college full time in August 2007, Applicant has been employed in a series of low-paying
jobs interspersed with three brief periods of unemployment, most recently July-August
2011. He has never married and has no children.
 
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits (GE 2-4) establish, 13 delinquent
debts totaling over $10,000. Applicant admits three debts totaling $6,000. He claimed,
without corroboration, to have settled SOR debt 1.i. He reported SOR debt 1.a on his
May 2012 clearance application (GE 1). He claimed then to be working on a lump-sum
settlement, but the account remains unresolved.
Applicant traces his financial problems to his college days between August 2005
and December 2008, when he took advantage of several credit card offers targeted at
college students. When he stopped attending college full time, the jobs he held did not
provide enough income to remain current on his consumer debt.
Applicant asserts that he has bases to dispute most of the debts which he
denied. However, he did not document those disputes in writing; nor did he formally
dispute the accounts with the credit bureaus. He claimed, without corroboration, to have
received a settlement offer on SOR debt 1.d, but had not taken advantage of the offer.
He has not had any recent discussions with the creditors at SOR debts 1.a and 1.b
about repayment plans or settlements.
Applicant has not had any credit or financial counseling. He provided no current
budget. Applicant has not been in contact with any of his creditors recently. He provided
no work or character references, and provided no evidence of community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, disputed facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . ;
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;7
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications8
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
3
 
burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has delinquent debt dating
back several years that he has not addressed.4
The mitigating factors for financial considerations provide little help to Applicant.
His financial difficulties are recent and not infrequent, and the stated cause cannot be
considered unlikely to recur because much of the debt dates back to August 2007,
when Applicant left college.  Applicant’s unemployment and underemployment between5
2007 and May 2012 may be considered circumstances beyond his control, but even if
they could be so considered, Applicant has not been responsible in dealing with his
debts. He has had no contact with any of his creditors for several years.  He provided6
no corroboration of any claimed payments or bases for disputing his debts. He has
taken no action to address the debts that he admits are his.7
In addition, Applicant has received no credit or financial counseling. He has no
budget. Consequently, it is clear that the problem is not being resolved.  Moreover,8
Applicant has not even credibly stated his intent to resolve his delinquent debt and
avoid financial problems in the future. Further, Applicant provided insufficient evidence
to reasonably support a “whole person” analysis in favor of granting his clearance. I
conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
4
 
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-m: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
