KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant did not rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record, nor did he show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  Adverse decision
affirmed.  
CASE NO: 12-11933.a1
DATE: 08/18/2016
DATE: August 18, 2016
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-11933
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
24, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guide F (Financial
Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Department Counsel requested a hearing.  On May 31, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider record
evidence and whether the Judge failed properly to weigh the evidence.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the military from 1998 to 2008 and worked for a Federal contractor for
three years thereafter.  He experienced unemployment from late 2011 until early 2012, after which
he worked for a department store for several months.  He has worked for his current employer since
mid-2012 and has a part-time job as a barber.
In 2005, Applicant’s security clearance and his access to sensitive compartmented
information were withdrawn, partly due to his having deliberately omitted financial information
from his security clearance application (SCA).  In 2009, he completed another SCA, in which he
failed to disclose his delinquent debts.  In 2012, he completed his current SCA.  On this application
he failed to disclose his financial delinquencies as well as the 2005 revocation of his clearance.  The
Judge found that Applicant’s explanations for his omissions were not credible.
Applicant’s SOR lists several delinquent debts.  Applicant stated that his financial problems
were affected by a divorce.  He provided evidence that he had resolved one debt and was making
payments as required on another.  However, for the balance, the Judge found that Applicant did not
provide proof that he had resolved the debts or that they were the responsibility of his ex-wife.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant has a long history of completing SCAs and holding
clearances.  She did not find credible his explanations for his failures to have disclosed material
information, such as his claim that he was distracted during completing his SCAs and that he was
not aware of his financial situation.  She found that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate.  She
stated that his repeated failures to be honest cast doubt upon his reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment, resolving the Guideline E allegations adversely to him.
Regarding the Guideline F allegations, the Judge found that there is “significant evidence
his conduct is likely to recur and did not occur under unique circumstances.”  Decision at 8.  The
Judge noted Applicant’s evidence that his now ex-wife had failed to pay debts and had opened
accounts without his knowledge.  However, she stated that it had been several years since these
events occurred, and yet Applicant had done nothing to resolve his problems.  She stated that there
is no evidence of financial counseling, nor is there evidence to support Applicant’s claim that only
some of the debts are his.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s military
retirement and to his history of financial problems.  She stated that his deliberate omissions from
his SCAs are of greater concern.  She concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns raised
in the SOR.
2
Discussion
Applicant cites to various pieces of evidence concerning his financial situation, such as his
part-time job and his ex-wife’s contribution to his financial problems.  He argues that he has worked
hard to develop a plan for resolving his delinquent debts.  Applicant has not rebutted the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has he shown that the
Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05795 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 26,
2016).  Applicant has not specifically raised an issue of harmful error regarding the Guideline E
allegations.  He states that he was ashamed of his financial situation and cites to his service in the
military.  To the extent that he is providing context for his omissions, his argument does not
undermine the Judge’s finding that they were deliberate, nor does it demonstrate that her mitigation
analysis was erroneous.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Catherine M. Engstrom    
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
