1 
 
      
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 14-06653 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence) due his wife’s ties to Ukraine. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on April 29, 2014. 
On November 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on December 24, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
23, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on March 14, 2016. On March 23, 2016, the 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for April 12, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on April 21, 2016. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Ukraine. Without objection, I approved the request. The relevant facts are 
highlighted in the Administrative Notice section, below. 
 
Following the hearing, Applicant contacted Department Counsel and requested 
permission to submit additional documentary evidence. Department Counsel did not 
object, and on June 2, 2016, I reopened the record for the limited purpose of admitting 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B. 
 
Administrative Notice: Ukraine 
 
Ukraine is a republic with a political system composed of three branches of 
government. In February 2014, the parliament voted to remove President Yanukovych 
from office after he fled the country. This followed three months of massive anti-
government protests over his decision to postpone signing political and trade 
agreements with the European Union, in favor of closer ties with Russia, as well as his 
violent responses to the protests. Also in February, Russian armed forces intervened 
militarily in Crimea, which Russia occupied and purported to “annex” in March 2014. 
Additional unrest and civilian deaths occurred when pro-Russian protesters in eastern 
and southern Ukraine, some favoring greater union with Russia, others seeking greater 
autonomy from the national government, clashed with government forces. In May 
2014, President Poroshenko was elected, which signaled a strong democratic 
mandate for change in Ukraine. 
 
The Russian occupation of Crimea has displaced more than 18,000 
Crimeans and caused numerous human rights abuses. Thousands of deaths and 
injuries resulted from the Russian-backed separatists’ occupation of eastern Ukraine.  
Ukraine has also been cited for abuse of persons in custody, harsh prison conditions, a 
corrupt judiciary, societal violence against women, children, and ethnic minorities, and 
human trafficking. 
 
Despite attempts to cease hostilities and establish peace through political dialog, 
the government’s efforts have been largely rejected and the situation in Ukraine 
remains precarious. Violent clashes between Russian-backed separatists and 
Ukrainian forces continue in eastern regions of the country. In addition, Russian 
military forces continue to  occupy  the  Crimean  Peninsula,  supply  weapons  and  
material  support  to  the separatists, and are present on the eastern border of 
Ukraine. 
 
3 
 
The United States has condemned the invasion of Crimea and Russia’s 
continued efforts to destabilize eastern Ukraine. In December 2015, the State 
Department issued a warning to U.S. citizens to defer all travel to Crimea and the 
eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. Separatist groups have threatened, 
detained or kidnapped persons, including U.S. citizens, and violent clashes have 
caused over 9,000 deaths. There are reports of abuse against local populations 
that oppose separatist goals. The situation in Ukraine remains unpredictable and 
potentially volatile. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s cohabitant and mother of his child resides in 
the United States on an H1B visa, and is employed by the defense contractor where 
Applicant serves as president. The SOR also alleges that her parents are citizens and 
residents of Ukraine. Applicant admitted each of these allegations, and his admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.     
 
Applicant is the 44-year-old sole owner and key management official of a 
defense contracting company since October 2010. He graduated from high school in 
June 1989, and served honorably in the U.S. Army from November 1989 until 
December 1995. He attended community college for approximately two years.  
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Russia. She lived there with her family as a young 
child, and then moved with her family to Ukraine. She first came to the United States in 
2003 on a student visa, and attended a university for one year. She returned to Ukraine, 
completed her bachelor’s degree, and worked as an interpreter for a non-profit 
organization which promotes democracy throughout the world. In August 2006, she 
returned to the United States on another student visa. She attended a community 
college to complete several prerequisite courses, then matriculated into a university 
where she completed her master’s degree in 2009. 
 
Applicant and his wife met in 2009, when she started working at a company 
where Applicant had been employed since 1999. (Tr. 18; GX 1.) In 2010, Applicant 
started his own business, which includes defense contracts, and is seeking a facility 
clearance. (Tr. 12.) In 2011, Applicant’s now-wife started working for Applicant’s 
company. They began dating in mid-2012, had their daughter in March 2014, and 
moved in together in July 2014. They were married in September 2015. (Tr. 27-28.)    
 
Applicant’s company has 11 employees. His wife continues to work for the 
company. He considers her to be his “right hand.” (Tr. 43.) Despite the stated concern 
that Applicant’s foreign national, non-cleared wife works in a facility that administers 
government contracts and is seeking a facility clearance, Applicant offered no testimony 
or evidence to mitigate the concern. While Applicant’s company might have a defined 
protocol for protecting classified or proprietary information from those individuals without 
clearances, there is no record evidence supporting such protocol.   
 
4 
 
Applicant’s wife’s parents, sister, brother-in-law, and aunt are citizens and 
residents of Ukraine.1 Her parents, sister, and brother-in-law reside in an area in 
eastern Ukraine where separatists have seized control. The U.S. State Department’s 
Travel Warning specifically warns U.S. citizens against traveling to this region, 
recommends U.S. citizens living there to depart, and states that, “[s]eparatist groups 
have threatened, detained, or kidnapped persons, including U.S. citizens.”  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is retired from an unspecified occupation, but has been 
employed at a local history museum for about 15 years, which he helped to found. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a retired librarian, and also works at the museum. (Tr. 49-
50.) His in-laws are active in their community, where they have many personal ties. 
Applicant would like them to move to the United States, but does not think they would 
choose to do so. (Tr. 42-43; Tr. 50.) Applicant’s wife maintains weekly contact via Skype 
with her parents and sister. Her sister resides very close to their parents, and often 
Skypes with Applicant’s wife at the same time as their parents do. Applicant periodically 
exchanges pleasantries with his in-laws while his wife Skypes with them. Applicant’s in-
laws have visited him and his wife twice. Most recently, they visited on a six-month visa, 
which expired in May 2016. Applicant’s wife has a close relationship with her parents. 
Applicant has a good relationship with his in-laws. (Tr. 33-38) He believes they are 
“phenomenal people” and states “[t]hey are the parents I wish I had.” (Tr. 43.) 
Applicant’s wife maintains a close relationship with her aunt, which includes Skyping 
and in-person visits. (Tr. 38-39.) Applicant’s wife last visited Ukraine in approximately 
2013. (Tr. 32.) Her international passport, issued by Ukraine, expires in 2023. (Tr. 52.)  
 
Applicant’s wife first applied for U.S. citizenship in 2009 or 2010. (Tr. 52.) Since 
she has been employed, she has been legally in the United States on a work visa, 
sponsored by Applicant’s company, which was valid until September 2017. However, 
after they married, Applicant sponsored her for permanent resident status, for which she 
was recently approved. (AX A; AX B.) Applicant’s wife has been working to build her life 
in the United States, and states that, “Since I have been here for a while, I call this my 
home now . . . It would be my desire, and honor, to be part of this country, given the 
opportunity.” (Tr. 48-49.)   
 
In addition to owning his business, Applicant’s owns his home, and three rental 
properties. Applicant’s wife is on the deed, but not the mortgage, of their primary 
residence. They do not have any jointly held bank accounts. (Tr. 25-26) Neither 
Applicant nor his wife has any foreign property or financial interests. (Tr. 36.)    
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
                                                            
1  Applicant’s wife’s other foreign relatives were not alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s connections to and 
contacts with these foreign relatives through his wife is only being considered in assessing his mitigation 
case and whole-person factors.  
5 
 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
6 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
Guideline B:  Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of the Ukraine, that she 
works for a defense contractor seeking classified contracts, and that Applicant’s 
mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of the Ukraine. The security 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b):  connections  to  a  foreign  person,  group,  government,  
or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation   to   protect   sensitive   information   or   technology   and   the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  ISCR Case 
No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the 
person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 20, 2002); see also ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011).  Thus, 
I have considered not only Applicant’s relationships with his in-laws and Applicant’s 
wife’s relationship with her parents, but also the region where her parents reside, 
which may make them vulnerable to kidnapping or exploitation by separatist groups. 
7 
 
The instability of the Ukrainian government, the pervasive threats from Russian-
backed separatist groups, and the government’s poor human rights record are sufficient 
to establish the heightened risk required by AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of 
interest in AG ¶ 7(b). Additionally, Applicant’s wife’s employment at Applicant’s 
company, which services defense contracts and is seeking a facility security clearance, 
creates a potential conflict of interest. These two disqualifying conditions are 
established. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).   
 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶ 7(a). AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. Applicant’s contacts with his in-laws, and his 
wife’s contacts with her parents, are frequent and not casual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth with substantial 
personal and financial ties to the United States, including a business, a house, three 
rental properties, a family, and military service. He has sponsored his wife for 
citizenship, and she is now a U.S. permanent resident. Nevertheless, he is clearly 
bound by affection to his wife, who is a non-citizen employee of his company that 
services defense contracts. He has close personal ties to his Ukrainian-citizen in-laws. 
His wife maintains a close relationship and frequent contact with her parents, remains a 
citizen of Ukraine, and possesses a valid foreign passport. Applicant’s wife’s ties to 
Ukraine are significant, and these connections are imputed to Applicant. Although his 
connections to the United States are strong, they are insufficient to outweigh his 
connections to his wife and her foreign ties.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also specifically considered that Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army, and 
he is a small business owner with 11 employees.  
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
9 
 
not mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
             
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
