KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline J
DIGEST: Department Counsel points out that, besides a four-month period, the record is void of
any information about whether or not Applicant subsequently consumed alcohol.  Therefore,
there is nothing in the record to support a finding about of her alcohol consumption subsequent
to her background interview. (“[A]bsence of evidence is not evidence of absence”). 
Accordingly, the Judge’s statements that Applicant “no longer abuses alcohol” and “has not
abused alcohol for two-and-a-half years” are not supported by the record. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04825.a1
DATE: 08/04/2016
DATE: August 4, 2016
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04825
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 5, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On April 11, 2016, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  She has worked for her current
employer since 2006.  She is a high school graduate,  divorced, and raised two children.  One of her
children passed away in 2010 and the other is an adult.  She has held a security clearance since 1992.
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related incidents and legal violations.  She started
consuming alcohol at about age 15 and continued doing so, including at times to excess and the
point of intoxication, until about December 2012.  In 1986, she pled guilty to driving while impaired
(DWI) and hit-run property and was sentenced to 60 days (suspended), two years probation,
community service, and a fine.  In 1987, she was cited for failure to comply with restricted driving
privileges and failure to wear seatbelt.  In 1995 and 2005, she pled guilty to DWI offenses and
received suspended jail sentences,  probation, and fines. 
 
In 2012, Applicant was arrested for failure to stop at a stop sign/flashing red light and
reckless driving.  She pled guilty to a lesser offense and was sentenced to a fine.  Later in 2012, she
was arrested for DWI, possession of an open container, and failure to maintain lane control.  A
breathalyzer test revealed her blood alcohol content was 0.20.  In December 2013, she pled guilty
to the charges and was sentenced to 120 days (suspended), one year probation, driver’s license
suspension for 45 days, community service, and a fine.   
For about four months in 2013, Applicant received outpatient treatment on her own initiative
at a counseling facility and was diagnosed with alcohol abuse.  She also participated in an employee
assistance program (EAP).  In December 2013, she had three or four cocktails before bed.  In the
morning, she received a reprimand at work because she smelled of alcohol.  She revisited EAP
counseling, expanding its coverage to include grief counseling for the loss of her son.  She also
began attending alcoholic anonymous (AA) meetings and went through a divorce during this period.
2
Applicant has not abused alcohol since December 2013.  In March 2014, she completed early
the probation imposed for her last DWI.  She has been incident-free for over two years and continues
EAP counseling and participation in AA.     
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant has not abused alcohol in nearly two-and-a-half years. 
She sought help through outpatient treatment, EAP counseling, and AA participation.  It was unclear
whether her incident at work in December 2013 was a relapse, poor hygiene, or another reason
besides alcohol abuse.  She completed her probation early due to her positive progress.  She is
remorseful, understands the gravity of her past behavior, and is committed to maintaining sobriety.
Discussion
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After
the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at
3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Department Counsel challenges the Judge’s findings that Applicant “has not abused alcohol
in nearly two-and-a-half years” and that she provided sufficient evidence of actions she took to
overcome her alcohol abuse problem.1  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported
by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion
in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
1 In his analysis, the Judge found the mitigating condition in Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 23(b) was applicable.  This
mitigating condition states, “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides
evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent)
or responsible use (if alcohol user)[.]”  
3
We find Department Counsel’s argument to be persuasive.  During a background interview
in March 2014, Applicant stated that she last consumed alcohol the night before she received a
reprimand at work for smelling of alcohol in December 2013.  Department Counsel points out that,
besides that four-month period (December 2013 to March 2014), the record is void of any
information about whether or not Applicant subsequently consumed alcohol.  Her Answer to the
SOR and her Response to Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) do not address
her consumption of alcohol.  Therefore, there is nothing in the record to support an affirmative
finding about the nature of her alcohol consumption subsequent to her background interview, and
it goes without saying that there is nothing, and indeed can be nothing, concerning her conduct
following the close of the record.  See,  In re: Rail Freight Fuel Surcharge Antitrust Litigation, 725
F.3d 244 at 254 (D.C. Cir. 2013) (“[A]bsence of evidence is not evidence of absence”). 
Accordingly, the Judge’s statements that Applicant “no longer abuses alcohol” and “has not abused
alcohol for two-and-a-half years” are not supported by the record.  
Department Counsel also notes that the evidence of Applicant’s actions taken to overcome
her four DWI convictions and alcohol abuse diagnosis mostly predates her latest DWI sentencing
in December 2013.  Her security clearance application (SCA) dated February 2014 reflects she
successfully completed 40-hours of court-ordered substance abuse counseling as well as four months
of counseling or treatment in November 2013, which was the month before her alcohol-related
incident at work.  In her background interview, she provided amplifying information by stating she
enrolled in the EAP in August 2013, which included grief counseling regarding the untimely death
of her son.  In November 2013, she stopped the counseling because she “felt overwhelmed.”  After
receiving the reprimand in December 2013, her employer urged her to continue with the counseling. 
However, the record does not reflect whether she continued with the counseling or participated in
AA following her background interview in March 2014.  Consequently, the Judge’s finding that she
“continues with those resources” (Decision at 3) is not supported by the evidence in the record.    
   
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s mitigation analysis under the alcohol
consumption guideline was flawed because it relied heavily upon unsubstantiated findings about
Applicant’s continued sobriety and her ongoing involvement with counseling and AA.  For the same
reasons, Department Counsel contends the Judge’s mitigation analysis under the criminal conduct
guideline was defective.  In this regard, Department Counsel also notes that, except for the absence
of evidence of any additional arrests, there was no evidence that supported Judge’s finding that
“[Applicant] now comports her behavior appropriately.”  Additionally, Department Counsel
contends that the Judge erroneously concluded that Applicant finished her probation early.  While
her supervised probation ended early in about March 2014, she indicated in her Response to the
FORM that she remained on probation until December 2014. 
In light of the foregoing, we conclude that the Judge’s decision fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts founds
and the choices made; reflects an error in judgment; fails to consider important aspects of the case;
offers an explanation for the decision that runs contrary to the weight of the record evidence, and
is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-
01490 at 3-6 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).
4
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody    
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy       
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
