 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-02505 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On November 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems).1 In a 
December 4, 2014, response to the SOR, she admitted the allegations and requested a 
determination based on the written record. On July 30, 2015, the Government issued a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) with seven attachments. Applicant timely responded 
to the FORM with additional materials. Based on my review of the case file and 
submissions, I find Applicant mitigated use of information technology security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old senior systems engineer who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since 1980.  She married in 1992 and has one teenage child. She 
has earned a college degree. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
In May 2012, Applicant’s employer began an investigation based on a report 
alleging that Applicant connected her approved portable electronic device (PED) to her 
restricted personal computer. Applicant knew this was a violation of company security 
policy. (FORM, Item 6) It also looked into two earlier incidents from 2009 and 2011, 
respectively. Applicant previously had not been apprised these prior incidents were 
significant issues of concern. Specifically, it was found that in 2009, she had 
downloaded software to update her PED from the Internet onto a company computer, 
an act violating company policy. As well, she was cited for violating computer systems 
and electronic media policy in 2011 by synching her PED to a company computer.  
 
After the investigation, it was determined that Applicant had performed the three 
acts at issue, culminating in the following SOR allegations: 1) Applicant violated 
company procedure [X] (Internet Usage) in January 2009 by downloading software from 
the Internet for the PED she used at work, which was personally purchased, but 
required by the corporation, and installing it on a company computer without 
authorization (SOR allegation 1.b)2; 2) Applicant violated company Procedure [Y] 
(Computer Systems and Electronic Media) by syncing a PED to a company computer in 
November 2011 (SOR allegation 1.c), and 3) Applicant knowingly violated the 
company’s restricted security policy in May 2012 by connecting her PED into a 
restricted computer, and by keeping it inside a restricted program facility (SOR 
allegation 1a). In June 2012, as self-reported by Applicant on her July 2012 security 
clearance application (SCA), she was disciplined for negligence in mishandling 
hardware in 2012 and downgraded in security clearance after having her Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) access revoked. This occurred despite the finding 
that there had been no compromise. She was also reassigned and suspended for two 
weeks without pay. In November 2014, an SOR was issued, citing to the three 
allegations noted above. 
 
Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. In doing so, she noted that she had not 
been able to “procure” a copy of corporate procedures in effect before September 
2015.3 Elsewhere, she noted that the version available to employees is dated May 
2012.4 It is unclear whether she was originally given the version or versions in effect in 
2009, 2011, and before May 2012. There is no documentary evidence she attended any 
information technology-based security training, if offered. 
 
In mitigation to the allegations, Applicant offered the following additional facts. 
Regarding the 2009 incident, Applicant reported that employees were required to 
                                                          
2 The FORM does not include a copy of company regulations [X] or [Y], which are at issue in allegations 
1.b and 1.c. 
 
3 FORM Response, memo dated Oct. 9, 2015, at 6. But see FORM, Item 6, indicating she was given a 
copy of these procedures in June 2015. Therefore, the evidence is in conflict regarding whether she was 
ever provided a copy of these earlier editions or whether they were otherwise available to her. There is no 
copy of these regulations in the FORM. 
 
4 FORM Response, memo dated Oct. 9, 2015, at 8. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
provide their own PED (e.g., Blackberry) for work. Applicant’s PED was used so she 
could have timely and convenient access to her schedule and personnel records, none 
of which was considered classified. Her PED was specifically approved and sealed by 
building security for use in restricted areas. The software she obtained to synch with her 
PED was downloaded onto an unclassified office computer, which was a common 
practice for employees to update their PEDs and backup data. Applicant noted, 
“(m)anagement was aware that I had the PED, I had in fact already had it approved and 
sealed by security to allow for usage in restricted areas, so it seemed logical that 
security would be aware that software had to be downloaded in order to make the PED 
functional.”5  
 
As for the 2011 incident, Applicant admits she synced her company approved 
PED to an unclassified company computer outside the restricted area, and stresses that 
the computer was not a restricted computer. She notes that her PED was registered 
with the company for use in restricted areas and the company had sealed the window 
through which the PED could be synced to a similar PED. Moreover, her PED was not 
compatible to synch with a restricted computer as it was not a Bluetooth device, her 
restricted computer at the time had no working USB portal, and no classified information 
was on her PED. It was a common practice for employees to synch their PEDs through 
unclassified computers to make them functional because (a) all data is lost if the battery 
is not kept charged and (b) the only way to back up the data on a PED is to synch it with 
a computer because of the PED’s limited storage. She was not aware that synching a 
PED with an unclassified computer violated any policies, noting “I regret that I did not 
recognize that this common practice throughout [the company] constituted a violation.”6 
Given the circumstances and her understanding at the time, she thought it was 
permissible for her to use the unclassified computer to sync her approved PED. At the 
time, she was not informed that she had violated any policies.7 
 
The 2012 incident involved a new PED Applicant had purchased. It did not come 
with a charger that could be directly plugged into an electrical wall outlet. It could only 
be charged via a USB plug. In May 2012, Applicant was late for a meeting and 
discovered her PED battery was very low. If the battery became depleted, her PED 
would lose all new information. Applicant did not want to leave her PED openly in a 
hallway as it charged on one of the available unclassified computers, and there was no 
available USB plug in the area to which she was headed for her meeting. She 
purposefully retreated to her office, where she logged off and locked her computer, 
which had its USB port disabled. She then used that computer’s USB port as a conduit 
for electrically recharging her PED. She had previously been told by the support desk 
personnel that with these precautions, such charging was permitted. Applicant stresses 
that her actions were general practices within her unit. After she was interviewed over 
                                                          
5 FORM Response, memo dated Oct. 9, 2015, at 7. 
 
6 FORM Response, memo dated Oct. 9, 2015, at 9. 
 
7 FORM Response, memo dated Oct. 9, 2015, at 9. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
the matter in June 2012, she was given a copy of the regulations at issue in SOR 
allegations 1.b and 1.c.8 
 
Since that time, Applicant has been apprised of her violations and of the current 
rules and regulations. She now understands the regulations and the reasons behind 
them. She regrets her prior laxity. By all accounts, Applicant is a friendly, hard-working, 
and personable employee and colleague. Her collegiality helps make for a better work 
place.9 A work peer finds her to be “honest, trustworthy, conscientious . . . and capable 
of conducting work on secure and sensitive material.”10 That peer does not believe the 
allegations reflect her character or indicate how she will perform with respect to secure 
materials in the future. Another colleague notes that Applicant is dependable and has 
learned from her mistakes regarding the office computers and their system.11  
 
A final colleague wrote on behalf of Applicant. He has had both a DOD security 
clearance and SCI clearance since the 1980s. He has worked with and known Applicant 
for almost 20 years and knows her to be trustworthy.12 He wrote that: 
 
during the 2009 – 2011 time period it was common for people working in 
unclassified environments to have PEDs (blackberries, Palm Pilots, etc.). I 
did not use one, but they were commonly connected/sync’d with company 
computers. I know that some of these devices were personal and that 
some were provided by the company. According to my records, the first 
Information Security Awareness training I had for unclassified computers 
was on 01/04/2011. I do not have training records prior to that. It is 
possible that the training was not clear or did not cover whether personal 
versions of these items were “approved” to be connected to company 
computers. I have looked but cannot find copies of the Corporate Policies 
from that time period. I know personally we had this issue with USB thumb 
drives/memory sticks. It may have been unclear to [Applicant] what was 
permitted to be installed or connected to a company machine.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
8  FORM, Item 6. 
 
9  FORM Response, Attachment 2, reference dated Oct. 2, 2015. 
 
10 FORM Response, Attachment 3, reference dated Sep. 30, 2015. 
 
11 FORM Response, Attachment 4, undated reference.   
 
12 FORM Response, Attachment 5, reference dated Oct. 8, 2015. 
 
13 FORM Response, Attachment 5, reference dated Oct. 8, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
5 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
 One who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
The use of information technology systems security concern is found at AG ¶ 39:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining 
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about 
[one’s] reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question their willingness 
or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and information.14 
  
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following sections are potentially applicable: 
                                                          
14 Information Technology Systems include all related computer hardware, software, firmware, and data 
used for the communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of information. 
 
 
 
 
6 
a. illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; 
 
e. unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
f. introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or   
media to  or  from  any  technology  system  without  authorization, when 
prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations.  
 
Applicant admits the three allegations raised. Consequently, the above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate the use of information technology systems security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
a. so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.  
 
Applicant’s actions can be considered remote since they occurred between 2009 
and early May 2012, and were all related to the same tasking. The facts indicate 
Applicant did not initially receive a copy of the procedures at issue in, at least, the two 
earliest incidents, nor was she contemporaneously apprised that her acts were 
considered violations. In none of the violations were secure or classified information 
compromised. Over four years have passed since Applicant’s last misuse.  
 
Since her 2012 reprimand for the three incidents, Applicant has not experienced 
another security issue concerning information systems security. She has studied her 
company’s current procedures. Members of her company team have vouched for her 
trustworthiness. They have expressed their satisfaction that Applicant learned from 
these incidents and will not let such lapses happen again. Applicant provided 
persuasive evidence to show that sufficient time has passed since the incidents, that 
any security issues are unlikely to recur, and that her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment are not in doubt. Moreover, I am convinced that Applicant is 
remorseful for her actions, possesses a positive attitude toward the discharge of her 
security responsibilities, and will not repeat the behavior. AG ¶ 41(a) applies.15 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
                                                          
15 While mitigating condition 41(b) could apply to the earlier incidents, the evidence does not support a 
finding that Applicant’s conduct was the result of having “no other timely alternative readily available.” 
 
 
 
 
7 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a 56-year-old 
naturalized United States citizen who has worked for the same defense contractor since 
1980. She now serves as a senior systems engineer. She married in 1992, has one 
child, and has earned a college degree. She is highly regarded by her employer and 
work peers for her congeniality, hard work, diligence, and work performance. 
 
I also considered that Applicant’s last security incident occurred in early 2012 
without recurrence. Moreover, I considered the lack of training it appears she was 
offered before that time and the mission requirements of her position. Moreover, I have 
also noted the apparent conflict between her company’s written policies, everyday 
employee practice, and the input of the technical specialists. Finally, I also took into 
account the fact that Applicant fully admitted her mistakes and has taken initiative in 
seeking improvement. Her ability to follow the procedures now in place seems apparent 
from both her own comments and her multiple, positive recommendations. All of this 
demonstrates permanent behavioral changes toward security issues and the unlikeliest 
chance of recurrence. Applicant met her burden with sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline M. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
