 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02656 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E 
and financial considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 27, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 23, 2013. 
(Item 4) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
October 17, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for personal conduct under Guideline E and financial considerations 
under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 12, 2014. He denied two of the 
delinquent debts contending that they were duplicate debts. (SOR 1.a and 1.h) He 
attributed 11 of the debts to his wife writing insufficient fund checks without his 
knowledge. (SOR 1.b to 1.f, 1,l to 1p and 1.s) He admitted the remaining six debts. 
(SOR 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.q, 1.r) He denied the falsification allegation at SOR 2.a. He 
elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 2)  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on February 3, 
2016. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on February 9, 
2016, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely replied to the 
FORM on March 3, 2016, noting only that the name mentioned in line 1 of the FORM is 
his nephew’s name and not his name.1 He also reiterated that he has no access to 
classified information contained in safes, on computers, or in files. The only purpose of 
his job is to calibrate and maintain the test equipment used in secure areas. (Item 6) I 
was assigned the case on June 9, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as it was not authenticated by a 
Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not comment on the admissibility of the 
PSI when he replied to the FORM. Applicant waived any objection to the admissibility of 
the PSI summary by not providing any comments on admissibility when responding to 
the FORM. I will consider information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 46 year old high school graduate. Applicant served on active duty 
in the Navy from August 1988 until August 1991, and received an honorable discharge. 
He attended a community college from August 1995 to January 1997 but did not receive 
a degree. He has worked for the same defense contractor as an electronic technician 
from February 1997 until June 2005, and as a calibration technician from June 2005 to 
                                                          
1 This is merely an administrative mistake and has no bearing on the case.  
 
3 
 
 
present. He married in November 1990 but is now separated. He has two step children. 
(Item 3, e-QIP, dated September 3, 2014; Item 4, PSI, dated September 23, 2013) 
 
The SOR alleges financial security concerns as raised in a credit report totaling 
$16,558. (Item 5, dated September 13, 2013) The financial security concerns include a 
judgement (SOR 1.a), 11 debts based on checks returned for insufficient funds and 
placed for collection (SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.s); a past due 
credit card debt in collection (SOR 1.g); a vehicle repossession debt (SOR 1.h); a credit 
card debt in collection (SOR 1.k); a service debt in collection (SOR 1.m); an apartment 
rental account in collection (SOR 1.n); a utility debt in collection (SOR 1.q); and a 
telephone account debt in collection (SOR 1.r). The SOR also alleges that applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose on his e-QIP in response to a financial question that he 
had a judgement entered against him, had debts in collection, accounts cancelled or 
charged off, or debts more than 120 days delinquent (SOR 2.a).  
 
The debts at SOR 1.a and 1.h are for an account listed in collection for the same 
credit union. SOR 1.a is a judgement resulting from a car repossession, and SOR 1.h. is 
cited as the balance due on a car repossession. In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
alleges these are the same debt. The amount listed for the debts are similar and the 
timing contemporaneous. I find that SOR 1.a and 1.h are duplicates. Applicant alleges 
he does not owe either debt because the creditor wrote the debt off. Applicant did not 
present any information that the debt was in any manner paid or resolved except for 
being written off. 
 
Applicant alleges that the checks returned for insufficient funds were written by 
his former wife without his knowledge. He claims not to know about the returned checks 
until confronted by the security investigator. He did not present any additional evidence 
to explain the returned checks and his lack of knowledge of them. As to the remaining 
debts, he simply forgot about them. Applicant was confronted with all of his debts by the 
security investigator in September 2013. In response to questions from the security 
investigator, Applicant denied any knowledge regarding the accounts, collections, and 
judgment. He told the security investigator that he intends to research the debts to learn 
if they belong to him. If they are his accounts, he intends to pay them. He has not 
presented any information on steps taken to inquire about the debts or attempts to 
resolve them.  
 
Applicant stated he does not have a checking account or a credit card. He uses 
his debit card for all purchases. He reported that he has not had a service account for 
years with the telephone provider for the debt at SOR 1.r. He has not had an account 
with the credit union creditor for the debts at SOR 1.a and 1.h for years. The debt was 
written off by the credit union and sent to a collection agency. A credit union 
representative informed him that they do not have a debt listed for him. He did not 
present any evidence to verify his statements. He believes his financial status is good 
and he is able to meet his financial obligations. (Item 4, PSI, dated September 3, 2013, 
at 10 and 11) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant denies intentional falsification of his e-QIP for not listing any debts in 
response to financial questions. Applicant believes the debts were incurred more than 
seven years ago and outside the requirement to report them. He told the security 
investigator in the PSI that he owns his mobile home, and received a vehicle loan in 
January 2013 without issue. In addition, he does not believe he needs a special access 
clearance. He applied for the clearance because he was asked to apply by his 
company. He does not access classified information. He requires access only to the 
laboratory to calibrate the equipment.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debt as 
shown by a credit report, answers to the financial questions on the e-QIP, and 
responses to financial questions from the security investigator. The information raises 
security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to 
pay delinquent debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition under AG 
¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis for the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s unpaid debts are a 
continuous course of conduct and thus current. The debts were incurred in the normal 
course of everyday living. Most of the debts were from credit cards, utility bills, or 
repossession. The fact that the credit union wrote off the repossession debt and sent it 
to a collection agency does not affect the security clearance significance of the 
delinquent debt. The debts from insufficient funds checks may have been caused by 
conditions beyond Applicant’s control because the checks were issued by his wife 
without his knowledge. As a joint account holder with his wife, Applicant is also 
responsible for checks written on the account that are returned for lack of sufficient 
funds. Applicant has not presented evidence of any action he has taken to pay or 
resolve the returned check debts since he learned about the debts.  
 
 Applicant has not established that he has acted reasonably and responsibly 
under his financial circumstances. Applicant knew of the delinquent debt as early as 
September 2013. At that time, he indicated he would take steps to resolve the debts. He 
has not presented any documentation to show that he has taken any steps to resolve or 
repay any of the SOR debts. Applicant has also not indicated or presented evidence 
that he received financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant has not established a good-faith initiative to pay his debts. For a good-
faith effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence 
of a good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A security 
clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal 
debts. It is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. The facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in 
incurring and failing to satisfy debt in a timely manner must be considered. Applicant 
has not established a plan to pay the debts and has not shown a meaningful track 
record of debt payment. He has not presented documentation to show any contact with 
the creditors or any payments he made on the debts.  
 
There are security concerns about Applicant’s lack of action about his delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s debts have not been paid, and Applicant has not presented a 
reasonable plan to resolve his financial problems. Applicant has not shown that he 
 
7 
 
 
acted with reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and 
obligation towards his financial obligations. With evidence of delinquent debt and no 
documentation to support responsible management of his finances, it is obvious that 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control, that Applicant is not managing his 
personal financial obligations reasonably and responsibly, and that his financial 
problems are not behind him.  
 
 Applicant's lack of documented action is significant and disqualifying. There is 
ample evidence of irresponsible behavior, lack of good judgment, and unreliability 
because Applicant failed to document payment of any of his delinquent debts. Based on 
the identified debts and the failure to make arrangements to pay his debts, it is clear 
that Applicant has not been reasonable and responsible in regard to his finances. His 
failure to act reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an indication that he 
may not protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant has not presented 
sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations. Based 
on all of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security 
concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process (AG ¶ 
15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
Applicant did not provide any derogatory financial information on the e-QIP. As 
noted in the SOR and the credit reports, Applicant had significant delinquent debts. His 
failure to list his delinquent debts raises a security concern under Personal Conduct 
Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission concealment, or falsification 
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the financial part of the e-QIP. He stated 
he had no knowledge of delinquent debt until confronted with the debt by the security 
investigator in the PSI. While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, 
 
8 
 
 
concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement 
to the Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, 
concealment, or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate 
and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. 
The debts consisted of a judgment, repossession, insufficient funds checks, credit card 
debts, and utility debts.  
 
 Based on the number and type of debts, Applicant had to have received notices 
of the delinquencies. He had to know he had some type and number of delinquent debt. 
The insufficient funds checks were returned by the bank to the merchants that accepted 
them for payment from Applicant’s wife. Applicant would have received notice from both 
the bank and the merchants about the insufficient fund checks. He may not have been 
aware of all of the debt, but he knew he had debt. I find that Applicant knew he had 
delinquent debt when he completed his e-QIP. Since he had this knowledge, the only 
reason not to disclose the financial information was to deceive security adjudicators of 
the true state of his finances. Applicant deliberately failed to provide correct and 
accurate financial information on the security clearance application.  
 
 I considered the following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before bin confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
cause by or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstance that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 These mitigating conditions do not apply. Failure to provide full and complete 
information in response to questions on a security clearance application is not a minor 
offense. This failure to provide accurate information was recent and frequent. Applicant 
failed to provide accurate information in reference to his finances on his security 
clearance application in September 2013 and again in response to questions from the 
security investigator when he denied the debts and told the investigator that his finances 
were good and his debts current. He has not yet provided correct financial information. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Even though Applicant contends he 
does not have access to classified information, his employer believes he requires 
eligibility for access to classified information. He has access to areas where classified 
information is maintained. It is reasonable for his employer to believe he should be 
cleared for access to classified information.   
 
 Applicant knew he had delinquent debt when he completed his e-QIP and he 
deliberately failed to provide full and accurate information concerning his finances. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient credible documentary information to show 
reasonable and responsible action to address delinquent debts and resolve financial 
problems. Applicant has not demonstrated responsible management of his finances or a 
consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation and his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.g:  Against Applicant  
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1. I – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
