 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02586 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 23, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On February 5, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred her case to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
an administrative judge for a determination whether her clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On March 26, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated November 4, 2015, was provided to her by letter dated 
November 6, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on December 2, 2015. She was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information within the 
30-day period, which was received without objection.1 On May 2, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her answer, Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d, and admitted SOR ¶ 
1.c. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old manpower liaison employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2010. She seeks to retain her secret security clearance as a requirement of 
her current employment. (SOR answer; Items 3, 8)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1989. (GE 8) She served in the 
U.S. Air Force from August 1989 to September 2009, and retired after completing 20 
years of honorable service. (Items 3, 8) During Applicant’s service in the Air Force, she 
successfully held security clearances during her 20-year career to include having held a 
top secret security clearance for 13 of those years. (SOR answer; FORM response) She 
attended college for a time uncertain while she was in the Air Force, and incurred 
student loans, discussed below.3 (Items 3, 8; SOR answer; FORM response) 
 
Applicant was married from July 1997 to August 2004, and that marriage ended 
by divorce. She remarried in September 2007. She has two adult children. (Item 3) 
Applicant had a child during her current marriage; however, that child is deceased.4 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as FORM response.  
 
2
 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
3
 Applicant did not earn a college degree and the FORM does not contain the number of credit 
hours she earned. 
 
4
 Applicant stated she, “lost my first and only child with my husband in Oct 2010.” (FORM 
response) Further details regarding this tragic event are not contained in the FORM. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges two delinquent student loans totaling $17,957, one 
collection account in the amount of $8,132 for an automobile loan she co-signed for her 
brother, and an allegation of failing to file her 2011 federal and state income tax returns. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d) Department Counsel noted in his FORM that Applicant had failed to 
provide documentation to support claims made in her SOR answer that her debts were 
being resolved and that her tax situation was being addressed. Applicant, in large part, 
corrected those shortcomings in her FORM response. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began towards the end of her Air Force career 
when she was faced with a severe illness in the summer of 2009 that prevented her 
from working. She was unemployed from September 2009 to March 2010. During her 
illness, Applicant’s husband lost his job and the family’s income stream was severely 
affected. To compound Applicant’s situation, she lost her baby in October 2010 followed 
by the passing of her father in February 2011. Grief-stricken, she had the added 
financial burden of funeral expenses for her child and father. Following her father’s 
passing, Applicant became the primary caregiver for her mother. (SOR answer; FORM 
response)  
 
The following describes Applicant’s SOR allegations and their current status: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b – Student loans in the respective amounts of $13,132 and 
$4,825. Applicant consolidated these loans, successfully completed a rehabilitation 
program, and is in an established repayment plan making monthly payments of $166. 
Documentation submitted reflects that Applicant’s consolidated student loan account is 
in good standing. Debt(s) being resolved. (SOR answer; FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Collection account in the amount of $8,132 for a car loan. Applicant 
co-signed this loan with her brother to assist him in purchasing a car. Her brother did 
not make the payments as agreed and the lender turned to Applicant for repayment. 
The car ended up in her father’s possession and the car was towed to a garage before 
he died. Applicant recognizes that she bears responsibility for this debt. Negotiations 
with her brother and the lender are ongoing. (SOR answer; FORM response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Allegation that Applicant failed to file her 2011 federal and state 
income tax returns. Applicant submitted sufficient documentation supporting her 
assertion that she filed her 2011 federal and state income tax returns in 2014. 
Allegation resolved. (SOR answer; FORM response)  
 
There is no record evidence that Applicant sought financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same.”   
 
The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. Her debt 
is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and her 
behavior does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement.   
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s debilitating illness before 
and after her Air Force retirement followed by seven months of unemployment and her 
husband losing his job could not have been foreseen. This was followed by the tragic 
passing of her child and father and unplanned funeral expenses. After her father passed 
away, Applicant assumed responsibility as caregiver for her mother. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. Although Applicant did not receive formal 
financial counseling, her debts are being resolved and there are clear indications that 
her financial problems are under control.  Applicant has made a concerted effort to 
address her student loans by consolidating them and setting up a repayment plan. Her 
consolidated student loan account is in good standing. She has made a good-faith effort 
to resolve the automobile loan she co-signed for her brother; however, further action is 
required.5 Applicant has since filed her 2011 tax returns. AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
5
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether she maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
her debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s 20 years of Air Force service while 
successfully holding a security clearance and her employment with a defense contractor 
weigh heavily in her favor. She is a productive member of society. She is current on her 
day-to-day expenses, lives within her means, and her SOR debts are resolved or are 
being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person 
analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
(internal citations omitted). 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. Her efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident she will resolve the remaining debt on 
her SOR and maintain her financial responsibility.6    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                          
6
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the 
security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative 
security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). An administrative judge 
does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-
06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to 
grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a 
security clearance while she works on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this 
Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
