 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02422 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
criminal conduct and sexual behavior. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On July 11, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns 
under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline D, Sexual Behavior. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 2, 2014 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on March 17, 2016. It issued a Notice of 
Hearing on April 18, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 11, 2016. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
through 5 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
called one witness. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 23, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶ 1.a. He 
admitted he was arrested as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but denied the underlying charges 
regarding child molestation. He denied the allegations alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He did not 
answer the allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a; hence, his failure to answer those allegations will 
be construed as a denial. His admission is incorporated into these findings.  
 
Applicant is 45 years old and divorced. He was married to his first wife from 1992 
to 1996. He has two children from that marriage, a daughter, age 23, and a son, age 21. 
He was married to his second wife from 2002 to 2012. They have no children. In 2013 
he started working for a defense contractor. He also works for a private insurance 
company, and in his computer repair business. He has a medical disability. He earned a 
college degree in 2014. (Tr. 17-22.) 
 
On December 31, 1992, Applicant was arrested, jailed, and charged with three 
felony counts: (1) criminal sexual conduct, 1st degree, penetration, with a victim under 
13 - actor more than 36 months older; (2) criminal sexual conduct, 2nd degree, 
penetration, with a victim under 13 - actor more than 36 months older; and (3) assault in 
the 5th degree. He pleaded guilty and was convicted of count 2, a felony, and sentenced 
to 18 months of confinement, 3 months stayed. He was incarcerated until December 31, 
1993. The conduct underlying Applicant’s arrest occurred on October 24, 1992, and 
involved allegations of molestation of a young child, whom his wife was babysitting. (GE 
2, GE 4.) Applicant denied sexually fondling the child, but admitted spanking the child 
with a belt. (Tr. 25.) 
 
While imprisoned Applicant was required to complete a treatment program for 
sex offenders. That four-month program consisted of daily counseling sessions. After 
being released from prison he was placed on probation and a home monitoring system 
for six months. He was required to participate in weekly treatment sessions for sex 
offenders. (Tr. 35-36; GE 2.) 
 
Subsequent to returning home after leaving prison, Applicant was arrested and 
placed on probation for failing to register as a sex offender in December 1994. His 
young daughter was removed from his home because he had not completed the 
mandated sex offenders’ treatment. He was ordered to participate in treatment until 
1997 or 1998. (Tr. 38-39, 46; GE 2.) During this time his sister was awarded custody of 
his daughter. In 1996 he and his first wife divorced, and his sister gained custody of his 
young son, in addition to his daughter. (Tr. 29, 33-40.) Applicant could not regain 
parental rights over his children because he had not completed the required sex 
offender treatment program. As part of that program, he was required to disclose 
information regarding his personal activities, which he chose not to do, and as a result 
he delayed the completion of the program. (Tr. 42.)   
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In early 2006 Applicant wanted to regain custody of his son. He had married his 
second wife and had resumed treatment for sex offenders. At that time, he and his 
second wife were permitted supervised visits with his children. (Tr. 39, 45.) As part of 
the custody process, he sought an opinion from a psychologist regarding his risk of 
recidivism. (Tr. 45-46.) In a May 2006 letter to the court, the psychologist opined that he 
had reviewed the pertinent studies and concluded that there was a less than a 10% 
chance that Applicant would reoffend or sexually abuse his son. In reaching that opinion 
the psychologist considered the facts and behaviors underlying Applicant’s conviction 
as factual. (Tr. 45; Answer.) There is no mention in the psychologist’s reports that 
Applicant had denied the behaviors. 
 
In June 2006 Applicant’s daughter made allegations that he had engaged in 
sexual contact with her from the time she was 9 years old until she was 12 years old. 
She complained that the last time he had abused her was in April 2005 (Tr. 49-51.) 
Applicant was subsequently arrested and charged with two counts of criminal sexual 
conduct, 1st degree, penetration or contact with person under 13; and three counts of 
criminal sexual conduct, 2nd degree, sexual contact. Applicant said his daughter 
fabricated the charges against him. He said she also alleged that his sister and her 
husband engaged in similar conduct. All charges were dismissed. (Tr. 60; GE 4.) 
 
Later in 2006, Applicant’s two children were removed from his sister’s care and 
placed with his cousin, who subsequently adopted them. Applicant said he was not 
informed of this change in guardianship and termination of parental rights when it 
occurred. (Tr. 55.) He has not spoken to his daughter since 2012. (Tr. 53.) He has 
ongoing communication with his son. (Tr. 57.) He said he completed all sex offenders’ 
treatment in May 2006, and is now legally permitted to live with minor children. (Tr. 59, 
61.)  
 
Applicant’s son testified. He is 21 years old. He said that he made false 
accusations of sexual misconduct against his father because his sister repeatedly 
threatened and physically assaulted him until he agreed to do so. He was 11 years old 
in 2006 when he made charges against his father. He said he has had regular contact 
with his father for the past four years. (Tr. 66-69.)  
 
Applicant said that his employer is not aware of the allegations contained in the 
SOR. (Tr. 70.) In his closing argument, Applicant asserted that he never committed the 
crimes in 1992 or 2006. He emphasized that the 1992 allegation is over 20 years old 
and that he deserves a second chance. (Tr. 73.)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
The evidence established the above disqualifying conditions. In 1992 
Applicant was convicted in State court of a serious felony for which he was 
sentenced to 18 months of incarceration, which he served from the time of his 
arrest on December 31, 1992 until December 31, 1993. In 2006 he was charged 
with five counts of criminal conduct. 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
Applicant was convicted of criminal conduct that occurred in October 1992, about 
24 years ago. He did not complete the court-imposed sex offenders’ treatment program 
until May 2006. In June 2006 he was arrested and charged with criminal sexual conduct 
with his daughter as a result of allegations she made regarding abuse from about 2003 
to 2005. Those charges were dismissed, establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 32(c) as to 
that allegation. Based on the passage of time without the recurrence of criminal activity 
since 1992, the evidence establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a). Over the past 
four years Applicant and his son have re-established a relationship. In 2014 Applicant 
completed a college degree. Although he has worked for his employer since 2013, he 
presented no evidence of a good employment record. During this hearing Applicant 
continued to deny the underlying sexual behaviors leading to the 1992 conviction. He 
expressed no remorse or sadness over the totality of the situation, which caused his 
family pain and disruption for many years. Hence, the evidence establishes limited 
mitigation under AG ¶ 32(d). 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concerns that pertain to sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; and 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.  
 
The evidence raises both of the above disqualifying conditions. Applicant was 
convicted of criminal sexual conduct involving a minor. That behavior causes him to be 
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress, as it is the type of conduct, which, if 
known, could affect his personal or professional standing in the community. 
 
AG ¶ 14 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
  
  As articulated above under AG ¶ 32(a), the sexual behavior underlying 
Applicant’s criminal conviction occurred 24 years ago. Applicant presented a May 2006 
opinion from a psychologist that Applicant’s risk profile for committing similar behavior 
was less than 10%. That opinion did not include any reference to Applicant’s denial of 
the criminal conduct, and was drafted a month before additional allegations were raised. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude with reliable certainty that similar conduct will 
not recur. Additionally, there is no evidence demonstrating that Applicant’s behavior 
does not serve as a potential basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress. Applicant did 
not produce evidence that his employer or members in his community are aware of the 
sexual misconduct underlying the security concerns, which knowledge would diminish 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
his vulnerability to exploitation or duress. His concealment of the facts alleged in the 
SOR from his employer demonstrates his recognition of this ongoing vulnerability. 
Neither AG ¶¶ 32(b) nor 32(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 45-year-old 
man, who was convicted (based on his guilty plea of a serious crime years ago. As a 
consequence, he was incarcerated for a year, placed on probation, and ordered to 
participate in sex offenders’ treatment. Additionally, he was required to register as a sex 
offender. After failing to comply with those conditions, he was placed on probation until 
1997 or 1998. He said he completed all treatment requirements in 2006, about 14 years 
after the crime. Although he insists that he did not commit the crime that resulted in his 
conviction, those assertions lack credibility. It is most improbable that the State based 
its entire case on unsubstantiated facts, given the 18-month sentence he received, 
along with an order to undergo substantial psychological treatment. While he appears to 
be re-establishing his life, work, and a relationship with his son, the record does not 
contain sufficient evidence to support his eligibility for a security clearance, particularly 
considering the ongoing potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress.  
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct and sexual behavior. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
 
 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:                 Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:                 For Applicant 
    
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:                 Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
