1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 14-04272
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 24, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD)  issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E for Applicant.
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
 
On February 5, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4.)
On December 22, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on
January 8, 2016. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered 10 documentary exhibits.
(Items 1-10.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due by February 7, 2016.
Applicant submitted additional evidence, which has been identified and entered into
evidence without objection as Items A through D. The case was assigned to this
2
Administrative Judge on March 28, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 43 years old. She is married and has two children. Applicant received
a Bachelor’s degree in Management and Human Resources Management in 2002.
Applicant has been employed as Administrative Support since 2013 by her current
employer, a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection
with her employment in the defense sector. (Item 5.)
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 11 allegations (1.a. through 1.k.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically delinquent debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The delinquent debts total
$228,651, and the debts Applicant admits to total $227,424. The allegations will be
discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR: 
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan account in
the amount of $35,361. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR.
(Item 4.) She wrote that she has been attempting to consolidate all of her student loans,
which includes SOR allegations 1.b. through 1.h. and 1.j. She also wrote that she has
been taking credit counseling class, and she has been paying her student loans for a few
years.  
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $15,245. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item
4.)
1.c.  This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $28,105. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. She
wrote that this is the identical debt as 1.b., above. (Item 4.) As both debts list the same
creditor and have the same loan number, I find that this debt is a duplicate of 1.b.,
above. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $6,893. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item
4.)
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $118,016. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but
she wrote that she is researching this amount since she does not believe the amount
stated is correct. She wrote that this is the identical debt as 1.d., above. (Item 4.) As both
3
debts list the same creditor and have the same loan number, I find that this debt is a
duplicate of 1.d., above.
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $3,281. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. She
wrote that this is the identical debt as 1.d. and 1.e., above. (Item 4.) As all three debts list
the same creditor and have the same loan number, I find that this debt is a duplicate of
1.d. and e., above. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $3,891. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item
4.) 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $3,007.  (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. She
wrote that this is the identical debt as 1.g., above. (Item 4.) As both debts list the same
creditor and have the same loan number, I find that this debt is a duplicate of 1.g.,
above. (Item 4.)
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount
of $152. (Item 1.) Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. She wrote that this
debt was paid a long time ago, and she is currently disputing this debt with a credit
agency. (Item 4.) I find that Applicant has resolved this debt as established in Items 9
and 10. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent student loan in the
amount of $14,625. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item
4.)
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount
of $75. (Item 1.)  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. She wrote that this
debt was paid a long time ago, and she is currently disputing this debt with a credit
agency. (Item 4.) Post-FORM Item D establishes that this debt has been resolved. 
Applicant provided no information on her RSOR as to what, if any, steps she had
taken to accomplish her goal of consolidating her student loans. With the exception of
1.i. and 1.k, above, no evidence was submitted showing Applicant had made any
payments toward any of the other debts listed on the SOR. 
Applicant submitted a Post-FORM document showing some of her student debts
has been consolidated, although it is not clear which debts have been consolidated. As
of December 17, 2015, Applicant owed $76,999.61 for one student loan debt, and
$109,182.13 for another student loan debt, and no payments had yet been made. While
the document showed a first payment of $1,032.15 was due on February 5, 2016, no
evidence was submitted to show if this payment was made. (Item C.)
4
Applicant also wrote on her RSOR that her financial difficulties occurred, “due to a
fall in the economy, unexpected medical bills and loss of income due to being a military
spouse having to move frequently.” She also wrote, “My Mom was diagnosed with
cancer so I have been helping her pay for her home so she would not loose [sic] it.”
Finally Applicant wrote that the payments for her mother’s home had been reduced so
she would have more money to pay toward her delinquent debts.  (Item 4.) 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance
because she engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement, lack of candor,
dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was charged with Larceny, Fraud
and/or False Statements in May 1998 when she removed a laptop computer valued at
approximately $1,779 from a store without rendering payment. It is further alleged that
Applicant later returned with an empty box stating that the laptop she had purchased was
not in the box so she requested that she be supplied with another laptop. 
Applicant explained in her RSOR that she had paid for the computer, which was
being sold on a clearance, and when she realized the computer was not in the box she
went back into the store immediately. She averred that she was never charged with any
criminal offense. (Item 4.) I do not find that this allegation has been established.
2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested and charged with Theft in
an amount of between $300 and $500, and that she pled guilty and was fined and
sentenced to five years of probation, which ended in September 2008. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her SOR, but wrote that she was not certain about the date.
(Item 4.) A report from the Federal Bureau of Investigation confirms this allegation. (Item
8.)
2.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to provide truthful and candid
answers on a Standard Form 85P, executed by her on September 8, 2006, in which she
was asked, “In the last 7 years, have you been arrested, charged with, or convicted of
any offenses?” Applicant responded, “No,” to this question when, it is alleged, she had
been charged in the past seven years with Larceny, Fraud and/or False Statements as
set forth in subparagraph 2.a., above. Applicant denied in her RSOR that she was
attempting to mislead the Government, but she was not sure from what date to count.
(Item 4.)  Since subparagraph 2.a. has not been established, I do not find that the
Government has established this allegation.  
2.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to provide truthful and candid
answers to questions asked under Section 22 of an Electronic Questionnaires for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), executed by her on March 20, 2013. (Item 5.) The
question asked whether in the last seven years Applicant has been on probation or
parole or whether Applicant is currently on probation or parole. Applicant answered,
5
“No,” to this question and it is alleged that she deliberately failed to disclose that she had
been on probation until 2008, as set forth in subparagraph 2.b., above.
On her RSOR, Applicant wrote that she did not intend to falsify material facts on
her e-QIP and that this was an “honest mistake.” She wrote that this answer had to be
reset several times because of an error from a previous questionnaire. (Item 4.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a post-FORM letter from a financial planing company, dated
October 29, 2015, showing that she had received a counseling session and had set up
an action plan to help her better manage her fiances. (Item A.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
6
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt several years ago.  
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As reviewed
above, Applicant’s financial difficulties occurred as a result of a number of reasons
including: a fall in the economy, unexpected medical bills, a diminution of her income,
and having to pay for her mother’s mortgage because of her mother’s illness. However,
with the exception of two very small debts, Applicant has offered no evidence that she
has paid off any of the delinquent student loan debts listed on the SOR. Accordingly, I
find that this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
While Applicant has received some counseling to help her with her financial
issues, I do not find that ¶ 20(c) is applicable because I do not find that there is a clear
indication that the problem is solved. 
7
Finally, ¶ 20(d) is also not applicable, since Applicant has not taken action to
“initiate a good-faith effort to repay [the majority of her] overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.” To be applicable and controlling in the future, Applicant must establish a
consistent history of continuing to resolve these delinquent past-due debts and not
become past due on her present debts. At this time, I find Guideline F against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual intentionally falsifies material
facts or fails to furnish relevant information to a Government investigator, it is extremely
difficult to conclude that he nevertheless possesses the judgment, and honesty
necessary for an individual given a clearance. 
         With respect to Guideline E, I find that Applicant should have been aware that her
probation continued to September 2008, which is within seven years of when she
completed the e-QIP on March 20, 2013. In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under
Guideline E, I conclude that there was “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant facts from [a] personnel security questionnaire” by Applicant. Therefore, I find
¶ 16 (a) applies against Applicant. I do not find that any mitigating condition under ¶ 17 is
applicable. Therefore,  I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
      Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the mitigating conditions are not applicable at this time under Guidelines F and
E, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
8
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e. - 1.f.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.h. - 1.i.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: For  Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.:  For  Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.:  Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.:  For  Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
