 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06257 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Kenya and became a U.S. citizen in 2011. He holds a 
current Kenyan passport. He failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign 
preference security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On May 20, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under 
the guideline for foreign preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 17, 2015 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on March 17, 2016. It issued a Notice of 
Hearing on April 18, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 12, 2016. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 2, 
and 3 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. He did 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 23, 
2016. The record remained open until May 31, 2016, to give Applicant an opportunity to 
submit exhibits. He did not do so.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer Applicant admitted the sole allegation contained in the SOR. That 
admission is incorporated herein. 
 
Applicant is 40 years old. He was born in Kenya. He attended high school and 
college there, but did not complete a degree. On July 3, 2001, a few days prior to 
leaving for the United States, Applicant married a woman, who is a citizen and resident 
of Kenya. He arrived in the United States on July 25, 2001. From May 2006 to July 
2006, he attended a U.S. college. He became a U.S. citizen in May 2011. In October 
2013 he started working for his current employer. (GE 2.)  
 
In his April 2014 SF-86, Applicant stated that he and his wife divorced in March 
2010. (GE 1.) During a June 2014 investigative interview, he told the investigator that he 
was divorced from his wife. (GE 2.) However, while testifying he said that he is married 
to her and is in the process of obtaining a Kenyan divorce.1 (Tr. 15, 18-19.) He has a 
six-year-old child from a prior relationship with a woman, a U.S. citizen, with whom he 
lived after arriving in the United States. Applicant also has a daughter with his fianceé, 
who is a resident citizen of Kenya. That child was born in Kenya in 2014, and is a U.S. 
citizen. (Tr. 19, 22.)  
 
Applicant returned to Kenya in 2006, 2008, 2011, 2013, 2014, and 2016. He has 
a Kenyan passport that was issued in July 2007 and is valid until July 2017. As a 
Kenyan citizen, he used that passport for travel there in 2006, 2008 and 2011. (Tr. 26-
27; GE 2.) He used the Kenyan passport in 2013 at the point of entry into the country in 
order to avoid paying an entrance fee. (Tr. 28.) He visited Kenya twice in 2014, and 
once in 2016. (Tr. 29.) He said he used his U.S. passport for those visits. (Tr. 30.) 
 
During the June 2014 interview, Applicant stated that he would relinquish his 
Kenyan passport. (GE 2.) In February 2015 a Department Counsel emailed Applicant to 
advise him that he could surrender the Kenyan passport to his facility security officer 
(FSO), or destroy it himself in the presence of the FSO. She informed Applicant that 
possession of a foreign passport will result in a denial of a security clearance. (GE 3.) In 
September 2015 a different Department Counsel emailed Applicant to follow-up on his 
willingness to relinquish the Kenyan passport. Again, Applicant was informed of the 
obstacles a foreign passport posed in securing a security clearance and the steps he 
should take in order to surrender it, if he desired to do so. (GE 3.) Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of that email, and said he subsequently took the passport to his 
FSO, who refused to accept it. (Tr. 32.) He did not present any evidence verifying that 
his FSO was unwilling to accept the passport for surrender.  
                                            
1 This discrepancy of facts raises an issue of credibility, which will not be considered in the analysis of 
disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in the analysis of mitigating conditions and whole-person 
concept. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concerns involving foreign preference: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
Applicant was born in Kenya. He came to the United States in 2001 and became 
a U.S. citizen in 2011. He holds a valid Kenyan passport that expires in July 2017. He 
used it in 2013 in order to avoid paying an entry fee into Kenyan. The evidence raises 
the above disqualifying condition and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concern.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides one condition that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
  Applicant’s Kenyan passport has not been destroyed or surrendered to his 
security authority or otherwise invalidated. The evidence does not establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 11(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has been a 
naturalized U.S. citizen since May 2011. He has a Kenyan passport that expires in 
2017. He used that passport to enter Kenya in 2013 in order to avoid an entry fee. After 
being interviewed in 2014 about the status of his foreign passport, the Government, in 
February and September 2015, gave him information regarding the process for 
surrendering his foreign passport. To date, he has not destroyed, surrendered or 
otherwise invalidated the Kenyan passport. He insists that he has been unable to do so, 
but provided no evidence to corroborate that assertion. After listening to his testimony, 
including statements that he is in the process of obtaining a divorce from his wife, which 
contradict statements he made to an investigator and disclosed in an SF-86 in which he 
asserted that he was already divorced, I find that Applicant lacks credibility and the 
qualities of trustworthiness necessary for holding a security clearance. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
pertaining to foreign preference. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:                 Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
