KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief makes no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
He makes assertions about the conditions that resulted in his financial problems and his efforts to
resolve those problems.  The Judge discussed those matters in his decision.  The Appeal Board
does not review cases de novo.  Our authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the
appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-01176.a1
DATE: 08/04/2016
DATE: August 4, 2016
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01176
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On
May 28, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On June 1, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals  (DOHA) Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief makes no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, he makes assertions about the conditions that resulted in his financial problems and his
efforts to resolve those problems.  The Judge discussed those matters in his decision. 
  
The Appeal Board does not review cases de novo.  Our authority to review a case is limited
to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  See Directive
¶ E3.1.32.  In the absence of such an allegation, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a
security clearance is AFFIRMED. 
  
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member , Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy        
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
