 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01759 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, Applicant failed to mitigate 
personal conduct and criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 23, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed as part of a background 
investigation by The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on January 14, 2014. 
(Item 5)  After reviewing the results of the background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security 
clearance. On June 13, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for personal conduct and criminal conduct. These actions 
were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
 
2 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 2, 2014. He admitted the two allegations of 
criminal conduct (SOR 1.a, and 1.b). As to personal conduct, he admitted the 
misconduct allegation (SOR 2.a), but denied the falsification allegation. (SOR 2.b) He 
provided a detailed explanation for his responses with supporting exhibits. He elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on September 22, 2015. Applicant received a complete 
file of relevant material (FORM) on January 25, 2016, and was provided the opportunity 
to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant timely replied to the FORM on March 14, 2016. (Item 6) He 
provided detailed information on the alleged criminal and personal conduct security 
concerns with 20 exhibits. I was assigned the case on June 9, 2016. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 5) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI. Applicant objected to the admission of the PSI when he responded to the 
FORM. (Item 6, Response to FORM, dated March 14, 2016, at 2) I will not consider the 
information in the PSI in my decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a review of the case file and pleadings, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old strength and fitness coach who has been coaching 
soldiers on their fitness for a defense contractor since October 2013. He received a 
bachelor’s degree in May 1999 and a master’s degree in May 2004. He worked with 
college athletes from approximately 2003 until May 2012 as a strength and fitness 
coach at various colleges. He has never married.  
 
The criminal conduct security concerns allege that Applicant was charged with 
driving under the influence in June 2011. He pled no contest to the charge and was 
found guilty of reckless operation of a vehicle, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to 
pay a fine of $250, pay court costs, serve a suspended jail term of 30 days, and 
probation for one year. The fines and costs have been paid, and the suspended 
sentence and probation completed. (SOR 1.a)  
 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant was also charged with and convicted of telecommunications 
harassment on May 22, 2012. He pled guilty and was sentenced to pay a $100 fine and 
730 days of probation. The fine has been paid and probation sentence completed. 
Applicant petitioned the court for the records to be sealed. The records in the case were 
sealed on October 8, 2015. (SOR 1.b)  
 
Applicant admitted that in May 2013 he was terminated from his employment as 
a college athletic coach for violating the school’s policy on staff relationships with 
students. Applicant admitted the relevant facts of the allegation but noted that he 
resigned from the school rather than being terminated.  
 
He denied that he deliberately falsified his e-QIP by failed to list his conviction for 
telecommunications harassment. He states that after listing the reckless operations of a 
motor vehicle conviction in the e-QIP, he inadvertently clicked the “no” response as to 
further criminal convictions believing the question pertained to the reckless operation 
conviction. 
 
In his response to the SOR (Item 2), Applicant provided a detailed explanation of 
the facts surrounding each of his criminal charges. As to the driving while intoxicated 
offense, he reported drinking four beers in a four or five hour period before driving 
home. He was stopped by a police officer after making an abrupt lane change. He 
declined to take a field breathalyzer test. He states that he has not consumed any 
alcohol since this June 2011 offense because it opened his eyes to the dangers of 
drinking and driving. He has not consumed alcohol in five years and he has no interest 
in drinking alcohol. (Item 2, Response to SOR, dated July 2, 2014 at 1-2; Item 6, 
Response to FORM, dated March 14, 2016, at 2-3) 
 
Applicant was in a romantic relationship with Miss R, from November 2008 until 
December 2010. In June 2011 after being charged with driving while intoxicated, Miss R 
decided she no longer wanted a relationship with or to talk to Applicant. In January 
2012, Applicant tried to contact Miss R to restart their relationship. He was hired by 
another college and moved in to a new state in April 2012. He called Miss R to tell her 
he had moved. The next month Miss R filed a Telecommunications Harassment charge 
against Applicant. Since his conviction of this offense, he has not tried to contact or 
speak to Miss R. (Item 2, Response to SOR, dated July 2, 2014 at 2-4; Item 6, 
Response to FORM, dated March 14, 2016 at 3-4) 
 
In September 2012, Applicant was the head strength and conditioning coach at a 
college. Applicant worked with one of the college athletes, Miss W. They also started to 
meet for lunch on campus so Applicant could discuss problems with Miss W. By May 
2013, Applicant and Miss W realized they had deeper feelings for each other and they 
agreed to begin a personal relationship. The relationship was reported to Applicant’s 
supervisor. The supervisor determined that Applicant’s relationship with Miss W violated 
the school’s policy on amorous relationships. The supervisor asked Applicant to resign 
or be terminated. Applicant resigned from his position. Applicant and Miss W are still in 
a committed relationship. (Item 6, Response to FORM, dated March 14, 2016 at 4-5)  
 
 
4 
 
Applicant denied that he deliberately falsified his e-QIP (Item 30) by failing to list 
in response to question 22 his arrest and conviction for harassing communications. 
Applicant stated that after listing his driving while intoxicated offense, the computer 
program moved to the next section of the e-QIP concerning illegal use of drug. He did 
not realize there were more questions concerning other criminal conduct. He 
inadvertently missed the part of the e-QIP asking for other criminal convictions.  
 
Applicant included with his response to the SOR and his response to the FORM, 
letters of recommendation and certificates of commendation. In the response to the 
SOR, there is a letter from his attorney for the driving while intoxicated offense. The 
attorney reports that because of Applicant’s lack of criminal history and his cooperation 
and respectful behavior when stopped by the police, his plea agreement for a reduced 
charge was accepted. During the time the attorney worked with him, Applicant was 
honest and trustworthy. He believes the incident was isolated conduct. (Letter, dated 
June 24, 2014) 
 
Applicant included letters from his former supervisor at his present company. The 
supervisor knew Applicant for several years prior to Applicant’s working with the 
company. Applicant demonstrated loyalty, integrity, honesty, and good decision making. 
Applicant was always respectful of rules and regulations concerning protection of 
privacy and classified information. (Letter, dated June 30, 2014; Exhibits C and S, 
Response to FORM) 
 
Applicant also presented a letter from one of his former military clients. The client 
attests to Applicant’s ability as a strength and fitness coach. Applicant worked with the 
soldier to rapidly bring him to top physical condition. He notes that Applicant has the 
ability to communicate with soldiers at all levels from junior enlisted to senior officers. 
Applicant motivates, ensures correct action, and provides professional advice. 
(Response to FORM, Exhibit R) 
 
Applicant provided a letter of commendation from a school director of athletics 
that employed Applicant as a strength and conditioning coach. Applicant is dedicated to 
his profession. He developed a system to provide strength and conditioning programs 
for over 20 teams at the school. Applicant showed expertise, diligence, and motivation. 
The athletic director highly recommends Applicant as strength and conditioning coach. 
(Response to FORM, Exhibit T) 
 
Applicant presented certificates of completion of various courses in physical 
conditioning and first aid. He also presented completion certificates for various strength 
and conditioning continuing education classes. (Response to FORM, Exhibits F to Q) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
5 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). In June 2011, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated but convicted in accordance with his 
plea of the misdemeanor offense of reckless operation of a vehicle. In May, 2012, he 
was charged with and convicted of the misdemeanor offense of communications 
 
 
6 
 
harassment. This information raises Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted). Applicant’s criminal actions raise questions about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness and calls into question his ability and 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
I considered the following Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 32: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on  individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer presented in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that he person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant committed a criminal driving 
offense in 2011 and a harassing communications offense in 2012. There is no question 
that Applicant committed the criminal conduct since he admitted and pled guilty to the 
conduct resulting in convictions of the offenses or a lesser offense. The inappropriate 
conduct is recent happening four to five years ago. Since Applicant admitted the 
conduct, the circumstances were not unusual and can likely recur. There was no 
pressure to commit the offenses. He voluntarily drank alcohol and then drove his 
vehicle. He initiated the telephone calls resulting in the harassing communications 
offense. After these two offenses, Applicant was terminated from his employment for 
misconduct in May 2013.  
 
Applicant had three incidents of security concern in three years. It has only been 
three years since the last incident. Applicant claims he is remorseful for the conduct and 
will no longer engage in criminal conduct. However, three years of no criminal or 
improper conduct is not enough time to determine that there has been successful 
rehabilitation. For the reasons stated above, the allegations of criminal conduct cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, and his ability to 
comply with rules and regulations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks 
the central question whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person 
can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. (AG ¶ 15)   
 
In May 2013, Applicant, as a college staff member, had a romantic relationship 
with one of his student clients in violation of the college’s policies. He was terminated by 
the college for the violation of policy. (SOR 2.a) These actions are security concerns 
and raise the following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulation, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information); and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgement, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rules violation. 
 
A personal conduct security concern was also alleged because Applicant 
allegedly deliberately failed to list the May 2012 harassing communications offense on 
his October 2013 e-QIP. Applicant claims the omission was inadvertent. Applicant listed 
the driving while intoxicated offense and his job termination on the e-QIP. (SOR 2.b) 
The failure to list this material fact raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG 
¶ 16(a) (Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personal security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities).  
 
 I considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 for all of the 
disqualifying conditions under personal conduct: 
 
 
8 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
cause by or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information the individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstance that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthiness, 
unreliable or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
 There are two types of personal conduct security concerns raised by Applicant’s 
conduct: conduct that shows questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations; and second the failure to provide 
full, complete, and candid answers during the security clearance process. Applicant 
presented sufficient information to mitigate the failure to provide full and complete 
information allegation but not the unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
allegation.  
 
 Applicant admits that as a college staff member he had a romantic relationship 
with a student in violation of the college policy. Even though Applicant was aware of the 
college fraternization policy, he willingly entered into a relationship with a student. The 
college terminated his employment because of the relationship and the violation of 
policy. Applicant’s relationship with the student is another example of his continued 
dishonesty and failure to follow rules and regulations. His pattern of failing to follow 
rules and regulations is recent and significant. Applicant was involved in two criminal 
conduct incidents and a failure to follow rules and regulations incident in three years. 
Other than his own statement that he has reformed and will follow rules and regulations 
in the future, Applicant has not presented sufficient information to indicate that this 
pattern of conduct is not likely to recur. He has failed to mitigate personal conduct 
security concerns relating to following rules and regulations. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 Applicant denied intentional falsification for failing to list his conviction for 
harassing communications on his security clearance application. Applicant listed two 
other incidents of derogatory information on his e-QIP including a more serious criminal 
offense. While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. Since Applicant 
listed two of the three incidents of derogatory information on the e-QIP, there is no 
reason for him to deliberately not include the third incident which was a misdemeanor. I 
find that Applicant did not deliberately fail to provide correct and accurate information on 
the security clearance application.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the testimony and 
letters of recommendations from friends and supervisors and their evaluation of 
Applicant’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Applicant exhibited a pattern of dishonesty and violation of rules and regulations. 
He was convicted of reckless operation of a vehicle in 2011, harassing communications 
in 2012, and violation of his employer’s policy on personal relationships with students in 
2013. Applicant’s pattern of dishonesty and rules violation indicates that he has 
questionable judgment, is untrustworthy, lacks reliability, and is unwilling to comply with 
rules and regulations. Applicant’s actions indicate he will not properly handle, manage, 
and safeguard classified information. My finding that Applicant did not deliberately fail to 
provide accurate and complete information on his security clearance application does 
 
 
10 
 
not change my holding that the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct and criminal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b;   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
