 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02971 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mary E. Kuntz, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s foreign family contacts create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and an unacceptable 
security risk. The mitigating information is insufficient to fully overcome the foreign 
influence security concerns. Foreign preference security concerns are mitigated. 
Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 25, 2014, Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance 
application. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative 
decision to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. On June 23, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline C (foreign preference) and Guideline B 
(foreign influence).1 Applicant answered the SOR on July 20, 2015, and requested a 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals.  
 
The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2016. The DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 7, 2016, scheduling a hearing for April 4, 2016. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered four exhibits (Government Exhibit (GE) 1 through 4), and 
Applicant offered seven exhibits (Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1 through 7). AE 8 was timely 
received post-hearing. All exhibits were admitted into the record without objection. GE 3 
(Request for Administrative Notice of facts concerning the government of Israel, and GE 
4 (Discovery Letter)) were made part of the record but they are not substantive 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on April 14, 2016.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government requested that I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
the government of Israel based on documents published by the federal government. 
Applicant did not object, and I took administrative notice as requested. Applicant’s 
attorney questioned the current relevance and materiality of the information contained 
on the “Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage, 2005,” considering it was published in 2006 – ten years ago. The timeliness 
of this report relate to its weight, not its admissibility, and I accepted this document for 
administrative notice. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations and submitted a one-page letter with 
comments to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s SOR 
and hearing admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings 
of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior manager employed by a Federal contractor. 
Applicant, his siblings, and extended family members, were born in Israel to Israeli 
parents. Applicant’s father is a 90–year-old Holocaust survivor who immigrated to Israel 
in 1947. He worked for the Israeli government until his retirement, about 25 years ago. 
He receives a pension from the Israeli government and Holocaust survivor benefits. 
Applicant’s mother passed away in 2002.  
 
Applicant’s 54-year-old sister and 50-year-old brother are resident-citizens of 
Israel. They both served in the Israeli military for their mandatory active and reserve 
periods. His sister worked for an Israeli municipality. Applicant testified his siblings 
currently work for private companies and have no connection to the Israeli government 
or military. Applicant served in the Israeli military on active duty from 1977 through 
1981, and in the reserve until 1990. Applicant explained that he complied with his 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
mandatory military service. (GE 1) He was discharged with the rank of master sergeant. 
Applicant maintains contact with Israeli service members he met while in the service.  
 
Applicant completed an associate’s degree in electronics before joining the 
military. He received his bachelor’s degree in 1986, and his master’s in business 
administration in 1988. He also became certified public accountant (CPA) in Israel.  
 
Applicant’s wife was born in the United States. After high school, she went to 
study in Israel and exercised her “right of return” under Jewish law and was granted her 
Israeli citizenship. Applicant met his wife while she was studying in Israel in 1981. They 
were married in 1983, and his two daughters were born in Israel in 1985 and 1989. 
Applicant received his “U.S. green card” in 1989, and he and his wife and two daughters 
immigrated to the United States in 1990. Applicant’s son was born in the United States 
in 1995. Applicant’s wife and three children are dual citizens of Israel and the United 
States. He believes he last voted in Israel before 1989. Applicant became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 1997 and received his U.S. passport that same year. 
 
Applicant purchased a home in the United States in 1992. He became a licensed 
U.S. CPA in 1993, and worked for private companies between 1993 and 1997. He has 
worked for federal contractors in the public sector since 1997. He was hired by his 
current employer, a federal contractor, in 2014. Applicant denied any professional 
connection to or having worked in Israel since 1990.  
 
Applicant estimated his U.S. net worth to be about $1.2 million, including the 
value of his home, retirement accounts, stocks and mutual funds, cars, and bank 
accounts. Applicant denied any proprietary or financial interest in any foreign country, 
except for an apartment he and his wife own in Israel. Applicant purchased an 
apartment in Israel around the time he married his wife in 1983. After immigrating to the 
United States in 1990, Applicant’s sister lived in the apartment for some time and then 
managed the rental of the apartment for Applicant. In 2007, Applicant sold his old 
apartment and purchased a new apartment with elevator facilities and moved his father 
into the apartment. Applicant claimed he intends to sell the apartment when his father 
no longer needs it. Applicant testified that he did not know the value of his apartment, 
but estimated it was around $150,000. Applicant’s wife testified that she believed the 
apartment was worth between $400,000 and $500,000. (Tr. 95) 
 
Applicant is considered to be an honorable, forthright, and honest person. He is 
highly regarded among his colleagues for his professional work, and because he has 
been a leader among his peers. He has held senior positions of responsibility among his 
colleagues for many years. According to his references, Applicant has a keen analytical 
mind, and his work is considered the best - exceptionally well done. His supervisors 
consider him to be a highly trusted member of his company, who is a reliable, 
dependable, and a loyal American. His references, some of which have known 
Applicant since the mid-1990s, believe Applicant is deeply rooted in the United States, 
and that he has no preference for Israel over the United States. His references 
endorsed his eligibility for a security clearance without reservations. They noted 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant has been securing clients’ sensitive information and keeping it private for 
many years. (AE 2, 5-8) 
 
Applicant maintained and used a valid Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen and receiving his U.S. passport in 1997. Between 2006 and 2016, he traveled 12 
times to Israel using his Israeli passport to visit his father, family members, and friends. 
He has a large extended family and tries to visit Israel at least once a year. He noted 
that under Israeli law, he was required to use his Israeli passport to travel to Israel. He 
testified he had no notion that his use of the Israeli passport would demonstrate a 
preference for Israel over the United States. (AE 1)  
 
In addition to maintaining contact with his family in Israel, Applicant maintains 
contact with at least four long-time Israeli friends. One of his friends worked for the 
Israeli military industry, apparently as a civilian. Another friend was a military officer who 
recently retired. Applicant denied knowing his friends’ rank or military occupational 
specialty even though they have been friends since Applicant’s days in the Israeli 
military and them maintaining contact through the years. Applicant surrendered his 
Israeli passport to his facility security officer (FSO) in February 2016. (AE 2) He also 
expressed his willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship.  
 
Applicant noted that he has been living in the United States since 1990. He had 
to give up his professional license and career in Israel to move to the United States and 
was required to retest to obtain a U.S. professional certification to practice in the United 
States. He established and developed his professional life in the United States. 
Applicant and his wife raised their children in the United States as Americans and they 
do not intend to return to live or to retire in Israel. Applicant intends to retire in the 
United States and remain close to his children and their families. 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Israel. Israel is a 
parliamentary democracy with a diversified, technologically advanced economy. Almost 
half of Israel's exports are high technology, including electronic and biomedical 
equipment. Israel is a close ally of the United States, and the United States is its largest 
trading partner. 
 
Israel has been identified as a major practitioner of industrial espionage against 
U.S. companies. There have been instances of illegal export, or attempted illegal 
export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to Israel. Israeli citizens have been 
involved in criminal espionage and export control violations of U.S. restricted, dual-use 
technology with military applications. Illegal technology transfers, even to private Israeli 
entities, are a significant concern. Israel has become a major global leader in arms 
exports, and the United States and Israel have periodically disagreed over Israeli sales 
of sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third-party countries, including China and 
Russia. 
 
The U.S. and Israel have close cultural, historic, and political ties. They 
participate in joint military planning and training, and have collaborated on military 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
research and weapons development. Commitment to Israel's security has been a 
cornerstone of U.S. Middle East policy since Israel's creation in 1948. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the concerns about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Israel. He was born, raised, 
and educated in Israel by his Israeli parents and relatives. He immigrated to the United 
States in 1990, at age 33. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1997, and was 
issued a U.S. passport shortly thereafter. He possessed an Israeli passport before 
immigrating to the United States. After becoming a U.S. citizen and receiving his U.S. 
passport, Applicant renewed his Israeli passport and used it to travel to Israel, in 
preference to his U.S. passport. 
 
Applicant used his Israeli passport to travel to Israel at least 12 times between 
2006 and 2016. He explained that Israeli law required him to travel to Israel using his 
Israeli passport. He averred he used his U.S. passport exclusively to travel to any other 
country. At his hearing, Applicant expressed his willingness to renounce his Israeli 
citizenship. He surrendered his Israeli passport to his FSO in 2016. 
 
 Foreign preference disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 10(a) and (b) are supported by 
the evidence. If these conditions are not mitigated, it would disqualify Applicant from 
eligibility to hold a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for foreign 
preference:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 Applicant exercised his Israeli citizenship when he maintained and used an 
Israeli passport to travel to Israel in preference of his U.S. passport. He received 
privileges and benefits reserved for Israeli citizens, including that of owning property in 
Israel.  
 
 Applicant was made aware of the Government’s concerns raised by his 
possession and use of an Israeli passport, and he surrendered the passport to his FSO. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
He testified that he was not aware his use of the Israeli passport would indicate a 
preference for his Israeli passport. Applicant’s surrendering his Israeli passport 
mitigates the security concerns alleged under Guideline C. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying under AG ¶ 7 in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant’s father, siblings, and extended family members are citizens and 
residents of Israel. His father retired after being employed by the Israeli government and 
receives a retiree pension and Holocaust survivor benefits. Applicant and his siblings 
served in the Israeli military. He maintains contact with friends who are citizens and 
residents of Israel, including a retired military officer. Applicant’s wife and children are 
dual citizens of Israel and the United States. Applicant owns an apartment in Israel, 
purchased in 2007, with an estimated value between $150,000 and $500,000.  
 
  The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.2  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and 
obligation with his father, siblings, extended family members, and friends living in Israel. 
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there 
is always the possibility that Israeli agents or individuals operating in Israel may exploit 
the opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified information about the United States. 
Applicant’s relatives in Israel create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly 
or through his family members in Israel.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these three disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Israel. He was born in Israel 
and immigrated to the United States in 1990, at age 33, with his wife and two daughters. 
He was raised and educated in Israel by his Israeli parents and relatives. He completed 
and MBA and was a certified CPA before he immigrated to the United States.  
 
Applicant has been working for a government contractor since 1997. He is 
considered to be a top performer and was lauded for his professionalism, leadership, 
knowledge, and technical abilities. He is considered to be an honorable, forthright, and 
honest person. He is highly regarded among his colleagues for his professional work 
and because he has been a leader among his peers. His supervisors consider him to be 
a highly trusted member of his company, who is a reliable, dependable, and a loyal 
American. His references, some of which have known Applicant since the mid-1990s, 
believe Applicant is deeply rooted in the United States, and that he has no preference 
for Israel over the United States. His references endorsed his eligibility for a security 
clearance without reservations. They noted Applicant has been securing clients’ 
sensitive information and keeping it private for many years.  
 
Applicant testified that all of his financial and property interests (except for an 
apartment he owns in Israel) are in the United States, including a home he purchased in 
1992, bank accounts, and retirement and investment accounts. His estimated U.S. net 
worth is around $1.2 million. Applicant owns an apartment in Israel with a value 
between $150,000 and $500,000. He explained he would sell the apartment when his 
aging father no longer needs it. He denied having any other financial or property interest 
in any other foreign country including Israel. Although Applicant expressed his 
willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship, I have closely scrutinized his offer and 
afforded it less weight as it is clear that he would like to continue traveling to Israel to 
visit his family, and he still owns an apartment in Israel. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family members living in 
Israel. Although there is no evidence that Israeli government agents, or other entities, 
have approached or threatened Applicant or his family living in Israel, he is nevertheless 
potentially vulnerable to threats, coercion, inducement, and manipulation made against 
him when he visits Israel, or through his family members living in Israel.  
 
Considering Israel’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
history of espionage practices against the United States, Applicant is not able to fully 
meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his 
relatives who are Israeli citizens and living in Israel] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.” AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) have limited applicability and do not 
mitigate the foreign influence concerns. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant noted that he has been living in the United States since 1990. He 
established and developed his professional life in the United States. Applicant and his 
wife raised their children in the United States as Americans and they do not intend to 
return to live in Israel. Applicant intends to retire in the United States and remain close 
to his children and their families. Applicant references testified that Applicant and his 
family are deeply rooted in the United States and that he has never demonstrated any 
preference for Israel. Applicant promised to divest himself of the apartment he owns in 
Israel when his father no longer needs it.  
 
Notwithstanding, the risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress are significant 
because Israel has been identified as a major practitioner of industrial espionage 
against U.S. companies. There are documented instances of illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to Israel. Israeli citizens have been 
involved in criminal espionage and export control violations of U.S. restricted, dual-use 
technology with military applications. Illegal technology transfers, even to private Israeli 
entities, are a significant concern because the United States and Israel have periodically 
disagreed over Israeli sales of sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third-party 
countries, including China and Russia. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered that Applicant lived in Israel the first 33 years of his life and in the 
United States during the most recent 25 years. He has distinguished himself working for 
government contractors since 1997. Applicant considers the United States his home 
and he considers himself an American. He has an outstanding reputation as a loyal 
American and a top-notch professional. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s foreign family contacts create a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and an 
unacceptable security risk. The mitigating information taken together is insufficient to 
fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns. Foreign preference security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not carried 
his burden of persuasion and the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.i:      Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
