 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04325 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations, alcohol consumption, and 
criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations), G (alcohol consumption), and J (criminal conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 4, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 10, 
 
2 
 
2016, scheduling the hearing for May 23, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through J, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 1, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since December 2013. He worked for another defense contractor 
at the same location from May 2012 to November 2013. He served on active duty in the 
U.S. military from 2003 until he was honorably discharged in 2008. He continued in the 
reserves after his discharge. He has the credits for an associate’s degree, but he has 
not yet received a diploma. He is married with two minor children.1 
 
Applicant received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) under the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ) in 2004 for drunkenness and incapacitation for duty. He was 
reduced one pay grade, restricted to limits, and forfeited pay. Applicant stated that he 
passed out and had to be taken to the hospital where he was treated for alcohol 
poisoning. His heart stopped at one point, and he had to be revived by cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR).2 
 
Applicant was arrested in October 2009 and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI). His blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was .243%, or about triple the 
legal limit. He pleaded guilty. He was sentenced to 32 hours of community service, a 
fine, and attendance at a safe driving and alcohol awareness class.3 
 
Applicant worked as a bartender from about October 2010 to March 2011. He 
had been drinking at the bar and another establishment in March 2011 before driving. 
He lost control of his car, drove it off the road, and hit a fence. He did not have auto 
insurance at the time. He was arrested and charged with DWI – second offense; 
careless operation; operating vehicle with suspended license; and resisting an officer 
with force or violence. He pleaded guilty to DWI – second offense; careless operation; 
and resisting an officer. The suspended license charge was dismissed. He was 
sentenced to a fine, probation, and outpatient rehabilitation, which included group and 
individual therapy sessions, attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, 
random urinalysis tests, and a curfew. He completed the rehabilitation program in April 
2013.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-22, 38, 42-43; GE 1, 4; AE B. 
 
2 Tr. at 34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
4 Tr. at 19, 23, 25, 27, 36;-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant was arrested in June 2012 and charged with domestic abuse battery. 
Alcohol was not involved in this incident. Applicant and his girlfriend (now wife) had an 
argument that turned physical. Applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense. He 
testified the domestic violence was an isolated incident and “probably precipitated by 
[his] alcoholism and the problems [he] faced because of the alcohol and the other 
financial issues, [and his] difficult transition from the [military] to civilian life.”5 
 
Applicant testified that he only drinks “two or three beers or glasses of wine,” 
“about every two or three months,” and that he has cut out liquor. He and his wife 
married in August 2015, and they recently had their second child. He is concentrating 
on his work and being a good father to his two children. He testified that the security-
clearance process is “almost a make or break moment. This means that [he] continue[s] 
[his] recovery if this goes well, or [his] recovery receives another setback.” He has not 
been arrested since the 2012 domestic battery charge. He assures that he has learned 
his lesson and that criminal offenses will not be repeated.6 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
January 2014. He reported his 2009 and 2011 DWI cases, but he did not report his 
2012 arrest and subsequent conviction for domestic abuse battery.7 Applicant reported 
the reason that he left employment at the bar as “[q]uit for [f]amily [e]mergency.” He 
admitted in his background interview that the SF 86 explanation for quitting the bar was 
untrue and that the real reason he quit working at the bar was that he did not want to 
work around alcohol after his second DWI. He did not report any financial problems on 
the SF 86.8 
 
Applicant had extended periods of unemployment and underemployment after he 
left the military and before he started employment with a defense contractor in May 
2012. He was unemployed for about six weeks in 2013 when the contract changed 
hands. His employment issues, in conjunction with the expenses related to his criminal 
conduct, led to financial problems. He wrecked two cars, including the car in the second 
DWI, and did not pay the balances due on the car loans.9  
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling about $16,700. Applicant 
admitted owing all the debts at one time. He discussed his finances when he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in February 2014. He admitted owing most 
of the debts alleged in the SOR. He stated that in November 2013, he instituted a $250 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 20, 43-45; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. at 19, 25-26, 33-34, 45-46; GE 4. 
 
7 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified the SOR. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will 
not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered in gauging Applicant’s credibility, when 
assessing mitigation, and in the whole-person analysis. 
8 Tr. at 24; GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. at 22, 27, 38-39; GE 1, 4. 
 
 
4 
 
per month payment plan on the loan for the car he wrecked in the 2011 DWI. He stated 
that he considered himself to be financially stable, and that he intended to obtain a copy 
of his credit report and begin paying his debts one by one.10 
 
Applicant did not maintain the loan payments on the wrecked car. Credit reports 
show the date of last payment as March 2014. Applicant also did not begin a systematic 
plan to address his debts. He established that the $122 tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a) was paid in 
May 2016. His mother cosigned the loan on the car that was totaled in his 2011 DWI. 
She settled the $9,500 (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b as $10,250) loan for $3,800, which was 
paid in May 2016. Applicant settled a $539 debt (not alleged in SOR, but owed to same 
credit union as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c) for $350, which was paid in May 2016.11 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($1,614), 1.e ($577), 1.f ($417), and 1.g ($378) allege medical debts. 
The debts are listed on the February 2014 combined credit report (SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 
1.f were reported by Equifax, and 1.g was reported by Experian). The August 2015 
Equifax credit report lists the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e, but not the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. Applicant paid $1,203 toward three debts in May 2016. It is not 
completely clear which SOR debts were paid by the $1,203, but it appears to be two or 
three of the four medical debts.12  
 
The $3,344 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is not resolved. Applicant received 
financial counseling in the reserves. He testified that his finances are in better shape 
and that he intends to pay his mother back and resolve his remaining financial issues.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
10 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
11 Tr. at 27-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE C-J. 
 
12 Tr. at 29-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE I, J. 
 
13 Tr. at 28-33, 40-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5. 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his unemployment, 
underemployment, and legal problems. His legal problems were not beyond his control. 
Additionally, except for a six-week period when the contract changed hands, he has 
been steadily employed since May 2012.  
 
 When he was interviewed for his background investigation in February 2014, 
Applicant stated that he had a $250 per month payment plan on the loan for the car he 
wrecked in the 2011 DWI and that he intended to begin paying his debts one by one. 
That payment plan apparently lasted only a month and he did not begin a systematic 
plan to address his debts. About a year after he responded to the SOR, Applicant and 
his mother paid or settled several debts. The Appeal Board has held that “it is proper for 
a Judge to consider that an applicant, aware of his debts, has undertaken to address 
them only after having been advised that his clearance is in jeopardy.” See ISCR Case 
No. 11-13949 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 5, 2013). 
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal 
applicability. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable to the paid and settled debts and because 
Applicant received financial counseling. There are no mitigating conditions applicable to 
the unpaid $3,344 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. I find that financial concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
 
 
7 
 
Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
The security concerns for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct are set out 
in AG ¶¶ 21 and 30:       
 
21. The Concern. Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the 
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
30. The Concern. Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22 and 31 describe conditions that could raise alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct security concerns and may be disqualifying: 
 
22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s multiple alcohol-related criminal offenses and his domestic abuse 
conviction are sufficient to establish the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant’s March 2011 arrest. SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f do not 
allege separate criminal conduct; they allege what resulted from the 2011 arrest. SOR 
¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶¶ 23 and 32 describe conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct security concerns. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; 
 
32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s last arrest was in June 2012, and his last alcohol-related arrest was in 
March 2011. He completed his outpatient rehabilitation, which included group and 
individual therapy sessions, attendance at AA meetings, random urinalysis tests, and a 
curfew. He testified that he only drinks “two or three beers or glasses of wine,” “about 
every two or three months,” and that he has cut out liquor. He has stable employment.  
 
Despite those mitigating factors, I have lingering concerns about the extent of 
Applicant’s alcohol abuse and criminal conduct. He testified that the security-clearance 
process is “almost a make or break moment,” and that he was worried about his 
recovery if he receives another setback. I am also concerned about the inconsistencies 
in this case, including that Applicant failed to list his 2012 arrest and subsequent 
conviction on his SF 86. The above mitigating factors are insufficient to dispel the 
alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
 
9 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, G, and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. I also considered his criminal 
record and his financial issues. Applicant presented himself well at his hearing, and I 
was impressed with him. My initial reaction was that despite his record, Applicant might 
be an acceptable candidate for a security clearance. Only when digging deeper were 
Applicant’s inconsistencies and failed promises revealed. If my initial reaction eventually 
proves correct and Applicant pays his debts and refrains from further alcohol-related 
incidents and criminal conduct for a suitable period, he may receive a security 
clearance. That time may come, but it is not now. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.d-3.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
