KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Appellant’s brief raises no issue of harmful error.  We cannot consider new evidence
in appeal. Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-07018.a1
DATE: 08/18/2016
DATE: August 18, 2016
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-07018
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 27, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On June 8, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains a statement detailing the current status of Applicant’s debts.  The documents
Applicant attaches in support of his efforts to resolve his financial situation post-date the Judge’s
decision.  The Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the
decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
  Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Catherine M. Engstrom 
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
