 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02049  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her access to 
classified information. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen originally from Hong Kong. 
She has mitigated the foreign preference concerns raised obtaining a Hong Kong 
identification card in 2013 as well as the foreign preference and personal conduct  
concerns raised by her relationship with a former high-school classmate who is a citizen 
and resident of Hong Kong. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence, foreign 
preference, and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative 
judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 On April 4, 2016, I 
issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.3  The parties 
complied and submitted documents by the April 15, 2016 deadline. At the hearing 
convened on April 26, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on May 5, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
  
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about the People’s Republic of China (PRC), including Hong Kong (HK). 
Applicant did not object to the request, and it was granted. The written summary, along 
with its attachments, is appended to the record as HE III. 4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 49, has worked for her employer, a federal contractor, since 2008.  
She applied for a security clearance in November 2012 and was adjudicated favorably 
for access to classified information in March 2013. In December 2014, Applicant’s 
employer filed an incident report in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System indicating 
that Applicant revealed a foreign contact not previously reported on her November 2012 
security clearance application; and that she renewed her Hong Kong identification card 
in July 2013 after being granted access to classified information.5 
 
 Applicant’s parents are Chinese and immigrated to Hong Kong (HK) soon after 
they married. Applicant and her siblings were born in Hong Kong while it was under 
British rule, which lasted from 1841 to 1997, when the province Hong Kong became a 
Special Administrative Region (SAR) of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). As an 
SAR, Hong Kong maintains some autonomy from the PRC, which the United States 
supports under the “one country, two systems” framework. However, the PRC maintains 
authority on foreign relations and national defense. The PRC has an authoritarian 
government dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. The PRC has a poor record 
with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its practices include 
                                                          
2 The discover letter from Department Counsel and the letter from the Chief Administrative Judge 
regarding the Applicant’s rights and obligations in a DOHA proceeding is appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) II. 
 
3 HE I. 
 
4 Tr. 18. 
 
5 Tr. 21-22; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners. The PRC actively engages in acts of industrial espionage against the United 
States. The Nationality Law of the PRC defines who is considered a Chinese national 
and entitled to the benefits of Chinese citizenship. The law does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Foreign nationals seeking Chinese nationality must apply for naturalization. 
However, the nationality law was not applied in Hong Kong until July 1997.6 
 
Applicant and her family immigrated to the United States in 1984. She became a 
U.S. naturalized citizen in 1991. As reported on her November 2012 security clearance 
application, Applicant considers herself a dual citizen of the United States and China. 
However, it does not appear that Applicant has taken steps to apply for Chinese 
citizenship. Applicant also acknowledges that she has not had any contact with the PRC 
government as her time in Hong Kong was as a British subject. In the years since she 
immigrated to the United States, she has returned to Hong Kong four times. Her most 
recent trip occurred in July 2013.7  
 
Applicant reported her July 2013 trip to her employer’s security department two 
months in advance. In June 2013, Applicant completed the foreign travel form as 
required by her employer. She disclosed her plans to travel to Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
Applicant also disclosed her plans to make contact with a foreign national, Ms. W., a 
citizen and resident of Hong Kong. While on the trip, Applicant exercised her right, 
based on her birth in Hong Kong, to renew her Hong Kong identification card. While the 
identification card did not entitle Applicant to any benefits from the HK government, it 
allowed her the convenience of entering Hong Kong and China using an expedited 
immigration and customs process. After the trip, Applicant completed another form 
required by her employer’s security department and reported nothing of security 
significance happened on the trip.8 
 
 In December 2013, Applicant submitted a foreign contact form to her security 
department. In the months after returning from her trip, Applicant and Ms. W., 
maintained regular contact, exchanging text messages at least twice per month. On the 
foreign contact form, Applicant disclosed that she and Ms. W. met when they were 15-
year-old high school students in Hong Kong.  Applicant reported that Ms. W. was self-
employed as a tutor. Based on Applicant’s disclosure, the security department filed the 
incident report the next day.9 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a background investigator in April 2014. In a 
signed, sworn affidavit, Applicant explained that she did not list Ms. W. as an ongoing 
foreign contact on her 2012 security clearance application because they had not been in 
touch during the ten years before she completed the application. Applicant, who 
                                                          
6 Tr. 22, HE III. 
 
7 Tr. 23-24; AE K.  
 
8 Tr. 27, 29, 37, 41; AE E, K.  
 
9 Tr. 41-42; GE 3; GE F.  
 
4 
 
traveled to Hong Kong alone, contacted Ms. W. to see if she was interested in spending 
time together during her visit. As they made plans for Applicant’s trip, Applicant reported 
the contact to her security office as she believed she was required to do. Aside from Ms. 
W., Applicant swore that she has no other friends, family members, or assets in Hong 
Kong or the PRC.  She does not have any citizenship documents from the PRC.10  
 
 At hearing, Applicant testified that she believed she had taken all necessary 
steps to stay compliant with her employer’s security policies. The security office, which 
reviewed her application before she submitted it in November 2012, did not inform her 
that her reported dual citizenship status raised a security concern. Likewise, after she 
reported her ongoing contact with Ms. W. and the renewal of her HK identification card 
to the security office, she was not told that either raised an issue. After receiving the 
SOR in September 2015, Applicant surrendered her HK identification card to her 
security office in February 2016. She provided a copy of the disposition form she 
received from her employer.11 
 
Applicant also testified about her relationship with Ms. W. Although they have 
known each other since high school, Applicant did not describe the relationship as close 
or continuing. When Applicant first immigrated to the United States as an 18 year old, 
she and Ms. W. were in closer contact. They would exchange correspondence and 
Applicant would often send Ms. W. a small gift for her birthday. They drifted apart over 
time. Applicant saw Ms. W. on her trip to Hong Kong in 2001, but the two did not speak 
again until 2013. In December 2015, Applicant and Ms. W. had a falling out and have 
not spoken since then. Applicant has no desire to repair the relationship.12  
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States for 32 years. Her husband of 10 years 
was also born in Hong Kong and is a permanent resident of the United States. The 
other members of Applicant’s immediate family, her mother and siblings, are naturalized 
U.S. citizens.  Her father is deceased. Applicant has owned her home since 2004 and 
holds another $200,000 in U.S.-based assets. Applicant’s supervisor and several of her 
colleagues testified at hearing. Several others wrote character letters on her behalf. All 
describe Applicant has being diligent, reliable, trustworthy, and security conscious.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
10 GE 2. 
 
11 Tr. 27, 38, 48-49.   
 
12 Tr. 28-29, 42-45; AE K.  
 
13 Tr. 45-46, 53-66; AE B-D, G-K.  
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Security concerns involving foreign preference arise when an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States.14 
The SOR alleges that Applicant obtained a Chinese identification card after becoming a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. The allegation is not supported by the record. Applicant self-
identifies as a dual U.S. – Chinese citizen, claiming Chinese citizenship by virtue of her 
                                                          
14 AG ¶ 9. 
 
 
6 
 
birth in Hong Kong in 1966. Applicant was born in Hong Kong while it was under British 
control. The Chinese Nationality Law did not apply in Hong Kong while it was under 
British control. She obtained U.S. citizenship before the province reverted to Chinese 
control. Applicant’s assumption that she has Chinese citizenship is likely incorrect. As a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, the PRC would require Applicant to apply for Chinese 
citizenship. It does not appear that she has done so, making her ineligible for any type 
of citizenship documentation from the PRC government.  
 
However, for the purpose of this foreign preference analysis, it is not necessary 
to resolve this question. What is of concern here is that Applicant used the fact of her 
birth in Hong Kong to obtain benefits from the HK government, specifically, obtaining a 
HK identification card in July 2013. While this action does not invoke a specific foreign 
preference disqualifying condition, it could indicate a preference for Hong Kong over the 
United States. Accordingly, a general foreign preference security concern under AG ¶ 9 
has been raised, even without the applicability of a specific disqualifying condition. 
 
 However, Applicant has presented sufficient information to support a conclusion 
that she does not have a preference for Hong Kong or China over the United States. 
Applicant did not realize the security implications of obtaining the HK identification card. 
Upon learning of the concern, she surrendered the identification of the card to her 
employer in February 2016. Other than the identification card, Applicant has not 
obtained or received any other benefits from a foreign country.15   
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”16 Applicant has one foreign 
contact in Hong Kong - a woman she has known since high school, more than 25 years. 
Given the treatment of the PRC toward its residents, as well as the country’s reputation 
for being an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, this relationship may create 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, and coercion.17  
 
Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate the concerns raised by this 
relationship. The allegation is based on an incident report filed by Applicant’s employer. 
The underlying assumption is that the length of time people have known each other 
directly correlates to the closeness of their relationship. Applicant presented evidence to 
support a conclusion that her relationship with Ms. W is casual and infrequent.18 In the 
last 16 years Applicant and Ms. W. have seen each other twice. Each visit 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 11(e). 
 
16 AG ¶ 6.  
 
17 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
18 AG ¶ 8(c). 
 
 
7 
 
corresponding to Applicant’s trips to Hong Kong. The majority of their correspondence is 
related to birthday wishes and since December 2015 they have ceased contact. 
Furthermore, Ms. W’s occupation as a private tutor leaves little concern that she 
occupies a place in Hong Kong society that raises a security concern.19 Given the 
minimal contact Applicant has had with Ms. W. over the past 16 years, it is unlikely that 
this relationship creates a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. Furthermore, the 
depth of Applicant’s U.S. ties also makes it unlikely that the relationship with Ms. W. 
could create a conflict of interest. If any conflict was to arise, Applicant can be expected 
to resolve it favor of U.S. interests.20  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when her actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information.21 The SOR 
alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified her November 2012 security clearance 
application by failing to disclose a foreign contact, Ms. W. A statement is false when it is 
made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material 
information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently 
overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the information did not 
need to be reported. 
 
I conclude that Applicant did not falsify her application. She credibly testified that 
because of the infrequent nature of her contact with Ms. W. in the 10 years before she 
completed her security clearance application that she did not believe the contact 
needed to be reported. She appropriately reported the contact when she resumed 
contact with Ms. W. in 2013.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant does not have divided 
loyalties between the United States and Hong Kong or the PRC. Applicant was born in 
Hong Kong while it was still a British colony. She came to the United States and 
became a citizen before Hong Kong reverted to the PRC in 1997. British culture and 
capitalism influenced her as a youth, not the Chinese mainland dominated by the 
Communist Party. Since applying for eligibility for access to classified information in 
2012, Applicant has made a conscientious effort to comply with her reporting 
responsibilities as a clearance holder. She has demonstrated a high level of security 
consciousness in the years she has been granted access to classified information.  
                                                          
19 AG ¶ 8(a). 
 
20 AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
21  See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:    For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:    For Applicant   
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct:    For Applicant 
  
 Subparagraph 3.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.                                              
 
 
 
______________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
