 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04185 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 4, 2013, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 9, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 23, 2015. She answered the 
SOR in writing on July 28, 2015, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 15, 2015, and I 
received the case assignment on October 29, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on November 18, 2015, and I 
 
2 
 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled on December 9, 2015. The Government offered 
Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified. She did 
not submit any exhibits. She was given two weeks, until December 23, 2015, to send in 
any exhibits she wanted included in the record (Tr. 29). She did not send in any 
additional exhibits. The record closed December 23, 2015.  
 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 16, 2015. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant denied the factual allegations in Paragraphs 
1 and 2 of the SOR, with explanations. She also provided additional information to 
support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 52 years old, married with one child and five stepchildren. She works 
for a defense contractor. She has worked there continuously since approximately 1996. 
Applicant earns about $49,000 annually and her disabled husband receives about 
$24,000 in payments annually. (Tr. 12-14; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists three delinquent debts. Applicant claims the first one for 
$9,301 is no longer on her credit report. The second debt she contends she is disputing. 
The third debt she asserts she paid. The debt total as listed in the SOR is $18,985. The 
personal conduct issues alleged pertain to Applicant denying on her e-QIP and to the 
government investigator that she had any delinquent debts. (Tr. 17-27; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 In SOR Subparagraph 1.a Applicant is alleged to owe $9,301 to a bank. 
Applicant contends that because the debt does not appear on one of her credit reports, 
it is not owed by her. The debt originated in 2008. Her last contact with the creditor was 
2011. However, in 2013, after being confronted with the debt, Applicant explained to the 
government investigator that she co-signed for a car loan for her son and he defaulted 
on it. Any correspondence from the creditor Applicant sends to her son who is supposed 
to pay on the loan. She does not have any information about the status of the loan. She 
does not know if her son, who is still in the military, has arranged to repay the loan. 
Applicant contends the debt is resolved because the creditor “charged it off.” However, 
Applicant made no payments on the debt and it is, therefore, unresolved. (Tr. 17, 18, 
28; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 In SOR Subparagraph 1.b Applicant is alleged to owe a debt collection firm 
$9,430. The September 2015 credit report shows the debt as $17,957, including 
interest. Applicant stated in her Answer that she was disputing the debt. The debt 
originated in 2008 and she stopped paying on it in 2011. Applicant contends the debt 
was sold and resold to various debt collectors and the amount kept rising. She claims 
no collector could tell her anything about the debt but that it was owed. Her last contact 
with a collector was in 2013. Applicant claims she asked the debt collection agency for 
 
3 
 
 
the basis of the debt but has not received any information from them. Until she does, 
she will not pay the debt. She did not submit any documents to show the basis of a 
dispute or that a dispute was actually filed with the creditor or its status. This debt is 
unresolved. (Tr. 18, 19, 30; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes $254 to a financial institution (Subparagraph 1.c). She claims it is 
paid, but has no documents to prove that the delinquent debt was actually paid. She 
thinks she paid this amount in 2009 on a physician’s bill for medical treatment. At the 
hearing, she claimed she had a cancelled check stub and would send it in to be an 
exhibit. She never sent in any such document. The debt is unresolved. (Tr. 19; Exhibits 
2-5) 
 
 Applicant has a budget to manage her household expenses. She attended 
financial counseling in 2005. She has five credit cards, some with balances due. The 
total due is about $11,000, according to Applicant. (Tr. 15, 20, 21) 
 
 Applicant is alleged not to have answered Section 26 of the e-QIP truthfully by 
failing to disclose the debts listed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR (Subparagraph 2.a). She 
contends her son entered the military and she thought he made a payment arrangement 
with the creditor for the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.a. Therefore, she did not think 
she had to disclose the debt on which she was a co-signer. She also did not disclose 
the second debt listed in the SOR. She claims it was her first time completing an e-QIP 
and had sent for a credit report, but did not have it when she completed the e-QIP. She 
admitted she was aware that the three debts listed in the SOR existed before she 
completed the e-QIP. (Tr. 22, 23 32; Exhibits 3-5) 
 
 Applicant is alleged not to have disclosed her delinquent debts to the government 
investigator during a March 30, 2013 interview (Subparagraph 2.b). She denied 
defaulting on a loan or having debts turned over to a collection agency. Applicant’s 
denials were contradicted by the debts set forth in Paragraph 1 of the SOR. Applicant 
contends that when confronted with her debts by the investigator she admitted them. 
She did not volunteer the information before the investigator asked her about the debts. 
(Tr. 24-26, 33; Exhibit 2) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
 
4 
 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $18,985 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present time that 
remains unpaid. Applicant has three delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The evidence 
raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. As more fully explained below, none of the 
following mitigating conditions are fully applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted  responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s debt delinquencies continue to the present day. There are no unusual 
circumstances and they continue to recur because they are unpaid. AG ¶ 20 (a) is not 
established. 
 
The delinquent debts were not beyond Applicant’s control. She entered into the 
debts voluntarily. She has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20 (b) 
is not established.  
  
Applicant is not paying her debts in an orderly manner currently. Her last financial 
counseling session was in 2005. It has no effect on her spending and debt repayment 
plans. The financial problem of the unresolved debts is not under control. AG ¶ 20 (c) is 
not established.  
 
Applicant has not repaid the three debts listed in the SOR. She claims she repaid 
the third one but did not submit any documentary proof of payment. AG ¶ 20 (d) is not 
established because Applicant has not made any good-faith efforts to repay her 
delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant has not shown a reasonable basis to dispute any or all of the three 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20 (e) is not established.  
 
Applicant has no affluence that comes from a legal source and it is not an issue 
in her proceeding. AG ¶ 20 (f) is not established.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admits she did not disclose her three debts on her e-QIP nor did she 
disclose and discuss them with the government investigator until he confronted her with 
 
7 
 
 
them at the interview after she completed the e-QIP. She deliberately did not disclose 
her delinquent debts on her e-QIP or to the government investigator. AG ¶ 16 (a) is 
established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None of 
them apply: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 Applicant did not disclose her debts until confronted with them by the government 
investigator. AG ¶ 17 (a) is not established.  
 
 No person gave Applicant improper or inadequate advice concerning the security 
clearance process. AG ¶ 17 (b) is not established. 
 
 The debts are not minor. The failure to disclose them on the e-QIP or to the 
government investigator shows her behavior is not infrequent. There are no unique 
 
8 
 
 
circumstances involved. Applicant knew of the debts when she completed the e-QIP 
and spoke with the government investigator. AG ¶ 17 (c) is not established. 
 
 Applicant has not obtained counseling to change her behavior, including paying 
the debts. AG ¶ 17 (d) is not established. 
 
 Applicant has not taken any steps to reduce or eliminate any vulnerability 
because of the unpaid debts and her repeated failure to disclose them when requested 
by the U.S. government on the e-QIP or to the government investigator. AG ¶ 17 (e) is 
not established. 
 
 The information about Applicant’s delinquent debts is reliable and shown on 
three credit reports introduced as exhibits. AG ¶ 17 (f) is not established.  
 
 Finally, there is no allegation of association with persons involved in criminal 
activity, so AG ¶ 17 (g) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant deliberately has not paid 
her delinquent debts that started being overdue in 2008. She also has $11,000 in debt 
on her five credit cards. So while owing past-due debts, she incurs more debt, 
delinquent or otherwise. The money spent on repaying her credit cards could have been 
used to pay the delinquent debts. She has not provided proof of payment regarding any 
of the SOR debts. Applicant voluntarily undertook not to pay her debts when they 
 
9 
 
 
became due. She also failed to disclose them deliberately. She failed to establish that 
security-significant conduct will not recur, as there is no change in her behavior.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:             Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
