                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.  14-06954           
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns covering foreign influence. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On June 1, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why the DOD could
not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
the DoD CAF recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DoD  on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 13, 2015, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on January 14, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on April
27, 2016. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the Government's case
consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one
exhibit (AE A). The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 6, 2016. 
Besides its three exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of
certain facts with respect to the following documents: Afghanistan: Post-Taliban
Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, Congressional Research Service (October
2015); Report on Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan, U.S. Department of
State (June 2015); Obama Adjusts Troop Levels for Continuing Afghanistan Mission,
U.S. Department of State (October 2015); Army General Killed in Afghanistan, U.S.
Army (August 2014); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2014:
Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (undated); Afghanistan Travel Warning, U.S.
Department of State (May 2015).   
Additionally, I took administrative notice without objection of Background Note:
Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (November 2011); Country Specific Information:
Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (August 2013)
Administrative notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings. Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government
reports that are well known. Cf. Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co.
2006). For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
identified background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Afghanistan, in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 201 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.   
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record to document additional endorsements. For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted seven days to supplement the record; Department Counsel was afforded two
days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant submitted two endorsements, as
well as certificates of recognition and appreciation. Applicant’s submissions received no
objections and were admitted as AEs B and C.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has (a) a mother and sister who are
citizens and residents of Afghanistan; (b) a brother and sister-in-law who are citizens of
Afghanistan residing in the United States; (c) a mother-in-law and father-in-law who are
citizens and residents of Afghanistan; and (d) a spouse who is a citizen and resident of
Afghanistan. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations of the
SOR with explanations. He claimed that his mother and sister at this time are residents
3
of the United States, and will remain U.S. residents with the intention of becoming U.S.
citizens. He claimed that while his mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and
residents of Afghanistan, he will have no contact with them. And he claimed that his
brother and sister-in-law are residents of the United States, soon to become U.S.
citizens.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in October 2013 in Afghanistan to an Afghan citizen and
resident. (GE 1; Tr. 26) He has no children from this marriage. (GE 1) He earned his
high school diploma in January 2006, while a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He
claimed no post-high school education or military credits.
Applicant immigrated to the United States in February 2009 and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in March 2014. (GE 1) Following his graduation in 2006, he
worked as a translator for the U.S. Army in Afghanistan for three years (2006-2009). (Tr.
31-32, 36) Between 2009 and 2013, he worked as a translator for the Army. (Tr. 26, 36)
Applicant’s mother, brother, and sister immigrated to the United States in 2009.
They have become permanent residents in the United States and have applied for U.S.
citizenship. (GE 2; Tr. 28, 36) Only his mother-in-law and father-in-law remain citizens
and residents of Afghanistan.  Applicant’s father-in-law worked as a translator for the
U.S. Army in Afghanistan. (Tr. 36) His in-laws currently work in Afghanistan for the U.S.
Army (Special Forces) as linguists. Applicant’s in-laws have never been questioned or
threatened by Afghan government or military officials because of Applicant’s work as a
translator. Applicant has had no contact with his in-laws. (Tr. 27) His wife maintains
occasional contact with her parents about non-working matters. (Tr. 27-28)
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded in his work as an Army linguist in Afghanistan
supporting U.S. combat operations. (AEs A and B) He was credited by his commanding
officer in October 2011 with outstanding translations during field combat and
humanitarian operations. (AE A) Applicant’s commanding officer characterized him as a
valuable team member assisting coalition forces in Afghanistan. Other members of his
command were equally complimentary in their crediting Applicant with outstanding
translations. (AEs A-B) Stressing his strong grasp of English and dedication under fire
while involved in combat operations in high stress environments, they highlighted his
courage and devotion to his linguist duties while placing his personal safety at great risk
to support the Army’s missions. (AEs A-B) In recognition of his achievements while
4
carrying out his Army missions, Applicant earned a certificate of training in 2008 and a
certificate of appreciation in 2006. (AE B)
Country information on Afghanistan
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is sometimes referred to as the
crossroads of Central Asia. Since the British relinquished control of Afghanistan in
August 1919, Afghanistan has been an independent state. Between 1919 and 1973,
Afghanistan moved away from its longstanding isolation under a succession of Muslim
rulers: King Amanullah (1919-1929), Nadir Khan (1929-1933), and Mohammad Zahir
Shah (Nadir Khan’s 19-year-old son), who ruled Afghanistan for over 40 years (1933-
1973). See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 1-2. 
Prime minister Sardar Mohammad Daoud (between 1953 and 1963) mounted a
military coup in 1973 and seized power amid charges of corruption and malfeasance
against Zahir Shah and his royal family. (Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 2)
Daoud proceeded to abolish the monarchy, abrogate the constitution, and declare
Afghanistan a republic. His economic and social reforms contributed little, however, to
stabilizing political conditions in the country.   
Following a Soviet-supported overthrow and assassination of Daoud in April
1978, a Marxist government was formed with the backing of the Soviets. See
Background Note: Afghanistan, supra; Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
Sur Muhammad Taraki was installed as the country’s president of the revolutionary
council.  Opposition to the Taraki government increased as many of members of Afghan
elites, religious establishments, and intelligentsia were imprisoned, tortured, or
murdered. A revolt against the Marxist government occurred in the summer of 1978 and
quickly spread into a countrywide insurgency.  (Background Note: Afghanistan, supra,
at 3)
Soviet invasion
Seeking to take advantage of the unrest following the April 1978 coup, the Soviet
Union quickly signed a bilateral treaty of friendship and cooperation with the new Afghan
regime and increased its military assistance to the regime. See Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra; Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra. Faced with a
deteriorating security situation, the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in December 1979,
killed the Afghan ruler, and, backed by 120,000 Soviet troops, installed Babrak Karmal
(an exiled leader of the Parcham faction) as the country’s prime minister.  (Background
Note: Afghanistan, supra)
Afghan freedom fighters (mujahideen) who opposed the Karmal communist
regime, armed with increased weapons and training assistance from the United States
and its allies, collaborated with other Peshawar-based guerilla groups in the 1980s to
destabilize the Karmal regime. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
The resistance movement eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva
5
Accords (signed by the front-line states of Pakistan and Afghanistan, the United States,
and the Soviet Union). The agreement served to ensure that Soviet forces withdrew
from the country in accordance with their expressed commitments in February 1989.
(Id.)
Ascendency of the Taliban  
By the mid-1990s, the Taliban had risen to power in reaction to the anarchy and
increase of warlords in the aftermath of the withdrawal of Soviet forces.  (Background
Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 3-4)  Many of the Taliban had been educated in madrassas
in Pakistan with roots in rural Pashtun areas of the country. See Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, supra  Beginning with its capture of Kandahar in 1994, the
Taliban mounted an aggressive expansion of its control throughout Afghanistan. By the
end of 1998, its forces occupied almost 90 percent of the country, and reduced its
opposition largely to a small sections of the northeast and the Panjshir valley. (Id.)   
Bolstered by its imposition of an extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire
country, the Taliban committed massive human rights violations (particularly directed at
women and children), and committed serious atrocities against minority populations.
See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 4. From the mid-1990s, the Taliban
provided sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, and provided a base of operations for his and
other terrorist organizations. (Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra)  Bin
Laden and his Al-Qaida group are known to have provided financial and political support
to the Taliban, and acknowledged their responsibility for the September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks against the United States.   (id.) 
Beginning in October 2001 (following the Taliban’s refusal to expel bin Laden),
the United States and its coalition partners initiated a military campaign, targeting
terrorist facilities and Taliban military and political assets within Afghanistan. U.S.
military and anti-Taliban forces routed the Taliban and caused their rapid disintegration.
After the fall of Kabul in November 2001, a UN-sponsored conference was created to
restore stability and governance in Afghanistan. See Country Specific Information:
Afghanistan, supra.  From this conference emerged a Transitional Authority headed by
President Hamid Karzai. This authority (renamed the Transitional Islamic State of
Afghanistan) was charged with the responsibility of drafting a constitution. (id.)
While the core insurgent faction in Afghanistan remains the Taliban movement,
other militant factions present security challenges to the United states and the allied
government of Afghanistan.  One militant faction cited by U.S. officials as a particularly
potent threat to Afghan security is the “Haqqani Network,” which the Administration
reported to Congress in September 2012 as an organization that meets the criteria for
FTO [Foreign Terrorist Organization] designation. See Afghanistan: Post-Taliban
Governance, Security and U.S. Policy, supra, at 15-17; Administrative Notice, supra, at 
3)  
In 2012, the Haqqani Network was designated by the U.S. Department of State
as an FTO. See Post-Taliban Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, supra, at 22.
Other groups designated by the U.S. Administration as FTOs include a Pakistani group,
6
known as the Pakistani Taliban, that supports the Afghan Taliban from both sides of the
Afghan-Pakistani border. Another Pakistani group known as the Lakshar-e-Taryyiba
(LET) has been increasingly active inside Afghanistan. (Id.)   
A new constitution was drafted and ratified by a constitutional loyal jirga on
January 4, 2004. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 4-5; Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, supra. The Afghan constitution provides for indirect election of
the National Assembly’s upper house by the provincial councils and by reserved
presidential appointments. On December 4, 2004, the country was renamed the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.  (id.) Hamid Karzai was sworn in as Afghanistan’s President on
December 7, 2004. (id.) He presided over the new government’s first convened
parliament in late 2005.
Presidential and provincial elections in Afghanistan for 2010 were  coordinated by
the Afghanistan Independent Election Commission (IEC), with assistance from the
United Nations (UN).  Id. Challenged presidential election results in 2010 have not been
widely disseminated.  See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
Political conditions in Afghanistan
         A new democratic government assumed control of Afghanistan in 2004 following a
popular election. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. While the national
government has continued to expand its authority, it has been hampered in its ability to
deliver necessary social services and remains dependent on U.S.-led assistance.  See
Unclassified Report on Progress Toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan, supra.
With its international community support at work, its ability to secure its borders and
maintain internal order is increasing. Although the Taliban-led insurgency in Afghanistan
has lost ground in some areas, it remains resilient and capable of challenging U.S. and
NATO goals. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra., at 23.
Today, Afghanistan remains at risk from continuing threats from the Afghan
insurgency and extremist networks, including the Taliban, al Qaida, the Haqqani
Network, and other insurgent and extremist groups. See Report on Enhancing Security
and Stability in Afghanistan, supra, at 23; Administrative Notice-Afghanistan, supra, at 3
Iinternational  terrorists, fueled by Taliban and Al Qaida support, continue to assert
power and intimidation within the country. See Afghanistan: Post-Taliban Governance,
Security and U.S. Policy, supra, at 13-14.  Revenue from opium trafficking continue to
sustain the insurgency and Afghan criminal networks. See Report on Enhancing
Security and Stability in Afghanistan, supra.
In recognition of the continued threat posed by these networks to U.S. interests
in Pakistan, President Obama recently delayed the reduction of U.S. forces in
Afghanistan and planned transition to an embassy-based presence. See Administrative
Notice-Afghanistan, supra, at 3. Instead, he authorized the continued deployment of
5,500 U.S. forces in October 2015 in Afghanistan to support the U.S. counter-terrorism
mission there after 2016. See Obama Adjusts Troop Levels for Continuing Afghanistan
Mission, supra. 
7
Safety and security remain key concerns because these terrorist organizations
continue to target U.S. and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings,
assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, and hostage-taking. See Country Specific
Information, Afghanistan, supra, at 2-3. From December 2014 to May 2015, U.S. forces
suffered four confirmed insider attacks, which resulted in the death of one U.S. soldier
and three U.S. contractors, and the wounding of 12 additional personnel. See
Unclassified Report on Progress Toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan, supra, at
29; Administrative Notice, supra, at 3. And on August 5, 2014, a senior U.S. Army
General was killed by a member of the Afghan National Army during a visit to the
Afghan National Defense University in Kabul. See  Army General Killed in Afghanistan,
supra, at 23;  Administrative Notice, Afghanistan, supra, at 3.  Risks of terrorist activity
remain extremely high at the present time. (Id., at 2-4) 
Human rights conditions in Afghanistan remain poor by all reported accounts.
State Department reports confirm active insurgent activity in Afghanistan.  See  Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2014: Afghanistan, supra, at 1-3. No section of
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. See Travel Warnings, Afghanistan, supra.
Kabul, in particular, has experienced increased militant attacks in recent years,
including rocket attacks, vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices (IEDs), and suicide
bombings by the remnants of  Taliban and members of other terrorist groups hostile to
the Afghan government. (Id.) Foreigners throughout the country continue to be targeted
for violent attacks and kidnappings: some motivated by terrorism, and others by
common criminal activity. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra;
Administrative Notice-Afghanistan, supra, at 4. 
To date, Afghanistan has still not been able to build effective, honest, and loyal
provincial and district institutions and lacks a coherent tribal engagement strategy for
unifying the country. Besides being subject to Afghan laws, Afghan Americans may also
be subject to other laws that impose special obligations on Afghan citizens. See Country
Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra, at 6. U.S. citizens who are also Afghan
nationals do not require visas for entry into Afghanistan. Likewise, for U.S. passport
holders born in Afghanistan, a visa is not required for entry. For these individuals, the
Embassy of Afghanistan issues a letter confirming nationality for entry into Afghanistan.
(Id., at 2) The Afghan drug trade remains a major source of revenue for corrupt officials,
the Taliban, and other insurgent groups who conduct operations in the country. (Id., at
8-9.)
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) cases. These
guidelines take into account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for
the individual applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
8
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) .
AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the
context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
     
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
                Burd e  n    o  f  P roof
Under the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance
may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the
national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a
commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate
determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part,
9
on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515
U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). 
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. 
“[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). And because
all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the national interest, the burden of
persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a linguist for a U.S.-based defense contractor. He is an Afghan citizen
by birth and a naturalized U.S. citizen. His mother, sister, brother, and sister-in-law
reside in the United States, with intentions of becoming naturalized U.S. citizens.
Security concerns relate to foreign influence trust issues associated with Applicant’s
having a a mother-in-law and father-in-law who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan
with whom he maintains little contact. 
Applicant’s in-laws who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan have deep roots
in Afghanistan, a country rich in history and socio/political traditions, constitutional
government and institutional respect for human rights, intermixed with periodic reports of
abuses by police and government authorities. Despite encouraging efforts in the
development of strategic partnerships between Afghanistan and the U.S. in recent years,
terrorist organizations continue to target U.S. and Afghan interests by suicide operations,
bombings, assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, and hostage-taking. Human rights
problems continue to plague law-enforcement efforts. And foreigners throughout the
10
country continue to be targeted for violent attacks and kidnappings: some motivated by
terrorism, and others by common criminal activity. 
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s in-laws
residing in Afghanistan might be subject to undue foreign influence by either Afghan
government authorities or terrorist organizations linked to the Taliban and al Qaida to
access classified information in Applicant’s possession or control. Because Applicant’s
in-laws have Afghan citizenship by birth and reside in Afghanistan, they present potential
heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition  DC ¶ 7(a), “contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is
a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” The
citizenship/residence status of these extended family members in Afghanistan pose
some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign influence
that could potentially impact the privacy and security interests subject to Applicant’s
control. 
Because neither of Applicant’s two family members residing in Afghanistan  have
any identified Afghan government or military service affiliation, no consideration of DC  ¶
7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information,” or  DC  ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” have any
application to Applicant’s situation. Neither of Applicant’s in-laws residing in Afghanistan
have any history of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or appear to be
vulnerable to the same at the hands of Afghan government or military authorities.  
To be sure, Applicant’s in-laws are at some potential risk to terrorist attacks for so
long as they reside in Afghanistan. However, they know nothing about Applicant’s
linguist work that could be exploited by known terrorist organizations operating in
Afghanistan. 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. The AGs take into account the country’s demonstrated relations
with the United States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular
relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The
geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter. The
AGs also take into account the applicant’s demonstrated loyalty and willingness to
assume heavy risks associated with assisting the Army’s combat operations in a war
zone.
11
While the reports of terrorism and human rights abuses in Afghanistan are a
matter of some security concern to the United States, Afghanistan’s emergent status as
a strategic partner of the United States in its’ continuing war against terrorism is an
important political development that serves to promote political solidarity, and reduce
security risks and concerns between the two allied governments. 
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(b): “there is no conflict of
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” is available to
Applicant. Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty and professional commitments to the United
States are well demonstrated and sufficient under these circumstances to neutralize any
potential conflicts that are related to his relationships with his immediate and extended
family. MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or
exploitation,” has some applicability, too, based on Applicant’s infrequent contacts with
his family members residing in Afghanistan.   
 
One other mitigating condition has mixed application to Applicant’s situation:  MC
¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or
organizations from a foreign country.”  Between 2007 and 2013, Applicant completed
over 50 military deployments to Afghanistan as a cultural advisor without any
suggestions of a reporting lapse. Under these circumstances, presumptions are
warranted that he complied with all reporting requirements covering foreign contacts.
Whole-person assessment is available also to minimize Applicant’s exposure to
potential conflicts of interests with his in-laws residing in Afghanistan. As an Army
linguist, Applicant is strongly committed to protecting U.S. security interests in
Afghanistan and has consistently avoided any notable actions that might add risk to U.S.
security interests. 
Although his in-laws residing in Afghanistan remain at some risk to terrorist
attacks, they know nothing about his linguist missions that could be exploited in a
hostage situation. Whatever security risks associated with Applicant’s family members
residing in Afghanistan are imposed on Applicant, they are manageable ones based on
Applicant’s demonstrated devotion to duty and the protection of classified information
made available to him in the course of executing his command assignments. So, in
Applicant’s case, the potential risk of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to
bear on him, or his in-laws  residing in Afghanistan is minimal and mitigated. 
Overall, potential security concerns over Applicant's extended family members in
Afghanistan are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about
Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his familial
12
relationships in Afghanistan. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline B.
   
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:           For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                  
