1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02177 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the drug involvement concern. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
January 25, 2013.1 On February 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement.2 
 
                                                     
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known 
as a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
 
2 The Department of Defense acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR on October 14, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on January 13, 2016.   
 
 A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit documentary material to refute, extenuate, 
mitigate or explain the trustworthiness concerns. Applicant received the FORM on 
January 21, 2016. He did not submit a response to the FORM or assert any objections 
to the Government’s evidence. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2016. The 
Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 3) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant purchased and used marijuana (specifically THC), 
with varying frequency from 2006 to 2012. Applicant admitted the SOR allegation. The 
SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s SF 86, his summary of personal subject 
interview (PSI), and answer to the SOR. 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old information technology systems management 
consultant for a Government contractor. He is a high school graduate and has been 
married since 2000. This is his first application for a public trust position. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his illegal drug purchases and use in his SF 86, 
completed in January 2013. He stated he used THC from about May 2006 to about 
September 2012 for pain relief and recreationally, on a monthly basis. He also admitted 
to purchasing THC two to three times per year for personal use, from about May 2006 
to about July 2012. 
 
 In his PSI, he described his severe loss of cartilage in his joints which cause 
chronic muscle aches. In 2006, Applicant self-medicated his condition by purchasing 
and using marijuana in his residence about twice per month. He purchased marijuana 
from friends about two to three times per year, and his spouse, family and most friends 
are aware of his use. He claimed to have stopped marijuana use so that he could obtain 
a public trust position. 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the
3 
 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ Drugs are 
defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, 
stimulants, and hallucinogens). 
 
4 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustwrothiness concerns.  
Based on the evidence, I find that the following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction,” and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of marijuana purchases and use, including 
use through September 2012. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Based on the record evidence, no mitigating conditions are applicable. Although 
Applicant claimed his last use was in 2012, he has a long history of marijuana 
purchases and use for self-medication, ending when he applied for a public trust 
position. His claim of use twice a month to alleviate chronic pain, is troubling, since he 
has not shown medical evidence for his condition, or plans to substitute his self-
medication with a legal pain reliever. Additionally, he has not shown a disassociation 
from other illegal substance users or dealers, nor has he expressed a clear intent to 
stop all illegal drug use.  
 
 Although Applicant claims that he stopped using marijuana in anticipation of 
obtaining a public trust position, the circumstances in which he used drugs in the past 
remain the same today. He has not provided evidence from close friends, family or co-
workers with knowledge of his past drug use to substantiate his claims of abstinence, 
nor has he undergone a drug treatment program or drug counseling to assist him to 
refrain from future use or to aid me to determine his current status. Applicant failed to 
provide sufficient evidence for me to make a determination as to his current 
circumstances, or his future intentions with regard to marijuana use. His long history of 
marijuana use outweighs his claim of abstinence from illegal drug use. 
 
5 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  I have incorporated the evidence, my findings of 
fact, and comments under Guidelines H in this whole-person analysis. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust.  I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the drug involvement concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
    Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
