 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-03748 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gerald C. Hunt, Personal Representative 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant made substantial progress addressing the delinquent debts alleged in 
his statement of reasons (SOR), and his current delinquent debt total is $7,237. He 
surrendered his expired Jamaican passport to his security manager. Financial 
considerations and foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2014, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On November 
11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
 The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and C (foreign preference). (HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the 
DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which 
entails access to sensitive information. (HE 2) The DOD CAF recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether such access to sensitive information 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (GE 1)  
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR allegations. (HE 3) On 
October 16, 2015, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed. On April 4,  
2016, the case was assigned to me. On June 20, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for July 12, 2016. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. At the hearing, the Government provided five exhibits, and 
Applicant offered three exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
(Tr. 20-24; GE 1-5; Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A-C) On July 20, 2016, I received a 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.). On July 28, 2016, Applicant submitted one document, 
which was admitted into evidence without objection. (AE D) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
through 1.i, 1.k, and 2.a. He did not address, or he denied the remainder of the SOR 
allegations. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. (HE 3) His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old medical-enrollment specialist, who has been working 
for his employer for two years. (Tr. 44-45) He attended college for three years, and he 
did not receive a degree. (Tr. 44) His sons are ages 20 and 22. (Tr. 45) He has never 
married. (GE 1) He has not served in the Jamaican or U.S. military. (Tr. 44) There is no 
evidence of criminal offenses, alcohol or drug abuse, or violations of his employment 
rules.  
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2008 or 2009, and they were caused by 
four circumstances: (1) an employee stole customers and funds from Applicant’s 
business; (2) he was separated from the mother of his children; (3) he has been 
underemployed for several years; and (4) he is paying $500 monthly for his son’s 
college expenses. (Tr. 29, 32-33, 36-37, 54-55, 67-68; SOR response)  
 
Applicant’s annual salary working for a government contractor is $61,000, and he 
earns $15 per hour working in his part-time retail employment. (Tr. 45-46) His part-time 
employment is inconsistent, and he was unable to estimate the annual income from that 
employment. (Tr. 45-46) Applicant pays $500 monthly to fund his son’s college 
education. (Tr. 51, 79) He is able to pay his expenses and has sufficient income to 
make some progress paying his delinquent SOR debts. His son will soon graduate from 
college which will enable him to pay $500 monthly to address his debts. His taxes are 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
current, except he is paying an $1,800 federal income tax debt from tax year 2015 with 
automatic $125 deductions from his checking account. (Tr. 52-53, 70-72) 
 
The status of his SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.l are the same medical debt for $54. (SOR response) 
Applicant was “pretty sure” it was paid; however, if it is not paid, he promised to pay it. 
(Tr. 57) A $54 medical debt is shown as delinquent on his most recent credit report in 
the record, which is dated July 11, 2016. The duplicated debt in SOR ¶ 1.l is not 
indicated in his July 11, 2016 credit report. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card debt under collection for $2,975. On December 21, 
2015, Applicant paid $1,785, and the creditor wrote the debt is resolved. (Tr. 57-59; AE 
A at 1) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a credit card debt under collection for $3,374. On December 18, 
2015, Applicant paid $2,024, and the creditor wrote the debt is resolved. (Tr. 57-59; AE 
A at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is a credit card debt under collection for $4,534. On December 31, 
2015, Applicant paid $2,721, and the creditor wrote the debt is resolved. (Tr. 57-59; AE 
A at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a charged-off debt owed to a bank for $3,087. The bank is listed as 
the original creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d and in Applicant’s August 24, 2014 credit report as the 
originating creditor in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant’s October 26, 2015 credit report shows a 
charged-off account with a zero balance, and it indicates the seller is the collection 
company in SOR ¶ 1.d. (GE 4) Applicant’s July 11, 2016 credit report does not list this 
charged-off bank debt. (GE 5) It is reasonable to infer SOR ¶ 1.e is a duplication of 
SOR ¶ 1.d, and the debt was paid on December 31, 2015.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a charged-off store debt for $1,888. Applicant contacted the store 
and learned the debt was transferred. (Tr. 59) He has not been able to locate the entity 
holding the debt. (Tr. 59-60)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.g is a credit card debt under collection for $3,871. Applicant contacted 
the bank and learned the debt was transferred. (Tr. 60) He has not been able to locate 
the entity holding the debt. (Tr. 60)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.h is a charged-off store debt for $845. Applicant contacted the store and 
learned the debt was transferred. (Tr. 59) He has not been able to locate the entity 
holding the debt. (Tr. 59-60) Applicant’s July 11, 2016 credit report shows the store 
account as paid as agreed. (GE 5) A transferred account is not shown. (GE 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i is a mortgage account that went to foreclosure in 2009. The mother of 
Applicant’s children and Applicant separated. She remained in their home, and she was 
supposed to pay the mortgage. (Tr. 32) In 2005, they stopped paying the mortgage, and 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
she moved out. (Tr. 37, 69) Applicant tried to convince the mortgage lender to use a 
short sale, or to reduce the payments to no avail, and the property was foreclosed in 
2009. (Tr. 37-38) He received documentation from the creditor showing discharge of the 
debt, and he provided it to the Internal Revenue Service. (Tr. 70) Applicant believes he 
does not owe the creditor anything, and the debt is resolved. (Tr. 60) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j is a telecommunications debt under collection for $349. On January 
16, 2016, Applicant returned the creditor’s equipment to the creditor and resolved the 
debt. (Tr. 61) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k is a telecommunications debt under collection for $230. On February 
22, 2016, Applicant paid the collection company $231, and this debt is resolved. (AE C) 
 
Applicant’s July 11, 2016 credit report, the most recent credit report in the record, 
shows one collection account, one charged-off debt, one repossession account, a 
renegotiated mortgage, and late payments on several accounts.2 The collection account 
is the $54 medical debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.l. The charged-off debt shows the debt was 
paid in 2012, and the balance is zero. The repossession account shows pays as agreed 
in 2014, and the balance is zero.     
  
Applicant maintained contact with his creditors. (Tr. 63) He saved up some of the 
money and he borrowed $5,000 from his sister so that he could pay the debts listed in 
the SOR. (Tr. 63, 74-75) 
 
Applicant plans to pay all of his debts. (Tr. 39) His 2005 vehicle is a paid off. (Tr. 
38) He is very careful with purchases, and he does not live beyond his means. (Tr. 38) 
Applicant’s uncle was in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years, and his brother was in the U.S. 
Marine Corps. (Tr. 38) Applicant treasures his integrity, honor, and respect. (Tr. 38) He 
is loyal to his employer and the United States. (Tr. 39)  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant was born in Jamaica. (Tr. 40; SOR response) His birth records in 
Jamaica were destroyed in a fire. (Tr. 40-41; SOR response) He obtained a Jamaican 
passport to establish the location and date of his birth. (Tr. 40-41; SOR response) His 
Jamaican passport is a functional equivalent of a birth certificate. (Tr. 64) He did not use 
his Jamaican passport to travel. (Tr. 64) His passport expired in March 2016. (Tr. 65) 
On July 27, 2016, he surrendered his expired Jamaican passport to his security 
manager. (AE D) He does not intend to renew his Jamaican passport. (Tr. 65)  
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States, including his 
employment. Most of his family is living in the United States. (Tr. 41-42)    
 
                                            
2The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s July 11, 2016 credit report. (GE 5)  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s friend has known Applicant for 15 years. (Tr. 16, 25) He described 
Applicant as an honest, generous, and honorable person with excellent integrity who is 
conscientious about compliance with rules, diligent as an employee, and dedicated to 
his family and the United States. (Tr. 15-19, 25-33)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.2, and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met 
for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
      
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR alleges 
11 delinquent debts totaling $21,261 and foreclosure of his residence in 2009.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR states, and his credit reports 
corroborate 11 delinquent debts totaling $21,261 and foreclosure of his residence in 
2009. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to 
the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
  AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(d) are applicable. Four circumstances caused financial 
damage to Applicant in the previous eight years, and some of those circumstances 
delayed resolution of his SOR debts. An employee stole customers and funds from 
Applicant’s business; he was separated from the mother of his children; he was 
underemployed; and he was financially assisting his son with his college expenses. All 
of these are circumstances beyond his control except for his decision to assist his son 
with his college expenses.  
 
  Applicant paid three large debts and one small debt; his foreclosure debt is 
resolved; two debts are duplications; another debt was resolved with the return of the 
creditor’s property; and his current delinquent debt total is $7,237. Several debts 
included in this delinquent debt total are being transferred and are not payable until the 
current creditor surfaces. He promised to pay his remaining delinquent debts. Applicant 
is working a full-time job and a part-time job. His son will soon graduate from college, 
which will enable him to use the money sent to his son to address his debts. 
   
In ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal Board 
addressed a situation where an applicant, who had been sporadically unemployed and 
lacked the ability to pay his creditors, noting that “it will be a long time at best before he 
has paid” all of his creditors. The applicant was living on unemployment compensation 
at the time of his hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a circumstance was 
not necessarily a bar to having access to classified or sensitive information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
  Applicant has made significant progress on his SOR debts in the last year. He 
understands what he must do to establish and maintain his financial responsibility.4 He 
admitted responsibility for and took reasonable actions to resolve as much of his debts 
as was possible based on his limited income. There are clear indications the problem is 
being resolved and is under control. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns.   
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference trustworthiness concern stating, “when 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a) describes one condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern 
and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case: “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen . . . . This includes but is 
not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport.” Applicant, who is a citizen of 
the United States, possessed a current Jamaican passport, which he obtained because 
he could not otherwise establish the place and date of his birth. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies to 
his possession of a current Jamaican passport after becoming a U.S. citizen.     
 
AG ¶ 11(e) provides one condition that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
as follows: “(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” AG ¶ 11(e) applies to his possession of a Jamaican 
passport. On July 27, 2016, Applicant surrendered his expired Jamaican passport to his 
security manager. Foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old medical-enrollment specialist, who has been working 
for his employer for two years. He attended college for three years. He is sufficiently 
mature to comply with his public trust responsibilities. On July 27, 2016, he surrendered 
his expired Jamaican passport to his security manager. Applicant’s friend described 
Applicant as honest, generous, honorable, having excellent integrity, diligent, and 
conscientious about compliance with rules. There is no evidence of criminal offenses, 
alcohol or drug abuse, or violations of his employment rules.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling $21,261 and foreclosure of 
his residence in 2009. His taxes are current, except he is paying an $1,800 federal 
income tax debt from tax year 2015 with automatic $125 deductions from his checking 
account. He made substantial progress on his SOR debts by paying three large debts 
and one small debt; his foreclosure debt is resolved; two SOR debts are duplications; 
another SOR debt was resolved with the return of the creditor’s property; and his 
current delinquent debt total is $7,237. He would have resolved more of his delinquent 
debts if he had been able to locate the creditor currently seeking payment. He promised 
to pay his remaining delinquent debts. He currently holds full-time and part-time 
employment. His underemployment and lack of income have contributed to his financial 
problems. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination). There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his particular financial 
circumstances to address his delinquent debts. His overall history shows a “meaningful 
track record” of debt repayment. I am confident he will continue his establishment and 
maintenance of his financial responsibility.5  
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, the Directive, the 
Regulation, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations and foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are 
mitigated, and eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
                                            
5Of course, the Government may re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of access to sensitive information now does not bar 
the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider 
[trustworthiness] significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having 
negative [trustworthiness] significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). An 
administrative judge does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board 
has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary [public trust position] to allow her the 
opportunity to have a [public trust position] while she works on her financial problems.”). This footnote 
does not imply that this Applicant’s public trust position is conditional. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
