 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02549 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) He was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on October 13, 2014. 
(Item 3) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
October 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations under 
Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
 
2 
 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 20, 2015. He admitted the seven 
allegations of delinquent debt listed in the SOR. He elected to have the matter decided 
on the written record. (Item 1, Answer, dated November 20, 2015, with attachments.) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on February 4, 2016. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on February 18, 2016, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant filed a timely reply to the 
FORM on March 15, 2016. (Item 6) I was assigned the case on June 9, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 2) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI. Applicant did not object to admission of the PSI when he responded to the 
FORM. He has waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI. I will consider 
information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file. I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 67-year-old computer specialist. He received a bachelor’s degree 
in 1973 and a master’s degree in 2005. He married in April 1982 and divorced in 
October 2008. There was one child from the marriage. Applicant was a computer 
administrator for a defense contractor from July 1991 until November 2002. The 
company was sold to another defense contractor in 2002, and he has worked for that 
company as a computer specialist since then. He basically has worked for the same 
employer since 1991. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated May 16, 2014; Item 3, PSI, dated October 
31, 2014)  
 
The SOR lists and credit reports (Item 4, dated June 13, 2014; and Item 5, dated 
October 1, 2015) confirm the following financial security concerns for Applicant: a 
student loan in collection for $53,040 (SOR 1.a); a delinquent student loan for $10,975 
(SOR 1.b); a student loan in default for $14,000 (SOR 1.c); a student loan in default for 
$34,755 (SOR 1.d); a department store credit card charged off for $797 (SOR 1.e); a 
credit card in collection for $742 (SOR 1.f); and a credit card in collection for $2,181 
(SOR 1.g). The total for the SOR-listed delinquent debt is approximately $116,000. 
 
3 
 
 
However, almost $113,000 of this total is for student loans. Some of the listed student 
loans may be duplicates.  
 
Applicant attributes, in his response to financial questions from the OPM 
investigator during the PSI and in his response to the SOR, his delinquent debts to his 
former wife’s spending habits and his 2008 divorce. After the divorce, he had to pay the 
debts accumulated by his former wife during the marriage from only his salary. 
Applicant had large student loans for his daughter’s college education. (SOR 1.a – 1.d) 
Applicant attached documents to his SOR response to establish that the student loans 
have been consolidated and he has a payment plan in place with a credit counseling 
firm to pay the student loans. He has been working with the firm since 2007/2008 
paying them $250 per month to resolve the student loans. The original credit counseling 
firm was sold to another credit counseling firm in 2012. He provided documents of 
payment plans by automatic deduction from his bank checking account on SOR debts 
1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. (Item 1, Response to SOR, dated November 15, 2015; Item 3, PSI, 
dated October 22, 2014) 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided documents to show that the 
student loans have been removed from deferment, and he completed a rehabilitation 
program. His payments to the credit counseling firm on the student loans are still 
current. He also provided documents to establish that his other debts were paid in full 
on March 6, 2015. (Item 6, Response to FORM, dated March 15, 2016)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debt as 
shown by credit reports, answers to financial questions on the e-QIP, and responses to 
financial questions from the security investigator. The information raises security 
concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The evidence indicates an inability and not an unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has receive or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
 
The mitigating conditions apply. The behavior causing the financial issues 
happened long ago (2007/2008), was infrequent, largely beyond Applicant’s control, and 
occurred under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s former wife 
accumulated debt for the family through irresponsible spending. He divorced his wife 
and is no longer responsible for her spending habits and debts. He also had debt from 
student loans for his daughter. He had to pay these debts after the divorce on his salary 
alone. Applicant acted responsibly by hiring and working with a debt management firm 
paying them $250 monthly since 2007 to assist in paying his debts. Applicant is 
receiving financial counseling through the credit management company. He has clearly 
shown that his financial problems are under control. 
 
Applicant established his good-faith initiative to pay his debts. For a good-faith 
effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a 
good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant provided sufficient 
documents to establish that the student loans are no longer deferred. The loans have 
been rehabilitated through Applicant’s payments to the credit counseling firm. He is 
current with his payment plans for the debts. His remaining debts have been paid in full. 
By paying his debts, Applicant showed a meaningful track record of debt payment, and 
that he acted with reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and 
obligation towards his finances. Applicant has met his burden to show that he is 
 
6 
 
 
managing his personal financial obligations reasonably and responsibly, and his 
financial problems are behind him. There is ample evidence of responsible behavior, 
good judgment, and reliability. Based on all of the financial information, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
due to circumstances largely beyond his control. He presented evidence that he paid or 
resolved the financial issues listed in the SOR. He has made eight years of payments 
on the student loans. Applicant established that he acted reasonably and responsibly 
towards his finances, and that he will continue to responsibly manage his financial 
obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
