                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-00552
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Gregory A. Montegna, Attorney At Law
August 5, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIPs) March 14, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On August 27, 2015,
the Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DOD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 28, 2015, and he requested a
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge.  This case was assigned to this administrative judge on March 15, 2016.  A
notice of hearing was issued March 22, 2016, and the hearing was scheduled for April
27, 2016.  At the hearing the Government presented six exhibits, referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 6.  The Applicant presented no exhibits, but called four
witnesses to testify.   He also testified on his own behalf.  Applicant requested that the
record remain open in order to submit additional documentation.  The record remained
2
open until close of business on May 10, 2016.  Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing
Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was admitted without
objection.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on May 9, 2016.  Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 39 years old and is married with one step-child.  He has a high
school diploma and some college.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a
Customer Technical Representative and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in
connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
There are nine delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Applicant admitted each of
the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.  Credit reports of the Applicant
dated April 18, 2014; December 13, 2014; November 6, 2015; and April 23, 2016; which
include all three credit reporting agencies, reflect that he was indebted to each of the
creditors set forth in the SOR in an amount totaling in excess of $50,000.  (Government
Exhibits 3, 4, 5, and 6.)  Applicant has been working for his current employer since July
2003.  He has held a security clearance since then and has never incurred a security
violation.       
Applicant explained that about in 2006, after he got married, his mother-in-law
passed away, and he and his wife instantly took over the responsibilities of handling the
in-laws’ real estate holdings.  Although both of his in-laws names were on the deed to
the properties, his father-in-law had left and moved out of the country, and did not know
how to handle the finances anyway.  This included paying the mortgages on their house
and rental properties.  Applicant and his wife had no experience at managing property.
Applicant encountered a situation where a tenant was not paying the rent and so he had
to use his own funds to try to maintain the payments.  On occasion, he fell short.  At the
time, Applicant’s wife did not have steady employment.  In 2010, Applicant contacted a
bankruptcy attorney for advice and was told to stop paying his bills.  He later contacted
a family friend, who is also an attorney, who told him not to file bankruptcy because it
might negatively affect his security clearance.  For at least five years, Applicant did little
or nothing to resolve his debts, and things spiraled out of control.  
3
The following delinquent debts became owing: 
1.a.  A delinquent credit card debt owe to a bank that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $35,256.  Applicant states that he is not paying the debt
because it is old, there has been no legal action ever taken, and the statute of
limitations has expired.  Recently he has tried to contact the creditor to work out a
payment plan.  (Tr. p. 39.)  Post hearing, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy and
included this debt in the petition.   
1.b.  A delinquent credit card debt owed to a department store that was charged off in
the approximate amount of $5,795.  Applicant contends that this debt also falls within
the provisions of the statute of limitations.  Recently he has tried to contact the creditor
to work out a payment plan.  (Tr. p. 40.)     
  
1.c.  A delinquent credit card debt owed to a creditor that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $4,216.  Applicant contends that this debt also falls with the
provisions of the statute of limitations.  Recently, he has tried to contact the creditor to
work out a payment plan.  (Tr. p. 41.)  
1.d.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $2,404.   Applicant contends that this debt also falls within the
provisions of the statute of limitations.  Applicant has not contacted the creditor to set up
a payment plan.  (Tr. p. 41.) 
1.e.  A delinquent debt owed to a bank that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $2,232.  Applicant contends that this debt also falls within the provisions of
the statute of limitations.  Applicant has not contacted the creditor to set up a payment
plan.  (Tr. p. 42.)    
1.f.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $1,665.  Applicant has not contacted the creditor to set up a
payment plan.  (Tr. p. 42.)  
1.g.  A delinquent credit card debt owed to a bank that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $807.   Applicant has not contacted the creditor to set up a
payment plan.  (Tr. pp. 42 - 43.)   
1.h.  A delinquent credit card debt that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $464.  Applicant has not contacted the creditor to set up a payment plan.  (Tr.
p. 43.)  
1.i.  A delinquent department store account that was charged off in the approximate
amount of $399.  Applicant has not contacted the creditor to set up a payment plan.  (Tr.
p. 44.)
4
Applicant’s attorney has tried to contact some of the creditors.  Applicant
cancelled all of his credit cards.  He is taking credit counseling classes to help him
reduce his expenses.  
Three character witnesses testified on the Applicant’s behalf.  His pastor, who
performed Applicant’s marriage ceremony, and who has known him for fifteen years,
stated that he knew about the Applicant’s financial problems.  Even so, he believes that
the Applicant has been very responsible and of good moral character.  He has helped at
the church in various ways, for example, helping with developing programs for young
people at the church and assisting in those activities.  Applicant’s co-worker, who has
worked with the Applicant for the past four years, testified that Applicant is of good
moral character.  He further stated that Applicant provides service and support to the
United States Navy and he does not believe that Applicant is a security risk to the
United States Government.  A friend and business owner, who has known the Applicant
for thirteen years, testified that he believes Applicant to be honest, very responsible, a
devout Christian, and not a risk to the United States.  (Tr. pp. 59-70.)                
Applicant’s wife testified that they tried to file bankruptcy in the past but did not
do so because of her husband’s job.  She also stated that the debts were not her
husband’s, but that she incurred them alone, and that she takes full responsibility for
them.  (Tr. p. 73.)  She did not walk away from her parents’ debt because she did not
want to disappoint them, and because their properties were her own daughter’s
inheritance.  (Tr. p. 75.)  She stated that her husband is a good man and good husband.
(Tr. p. 72-76.)
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A indicates that he filed for Chapter 13
Bankruptcy on May 10, 2016.  It states that Applicant’s petition for Bankruptcy was
prepared and ready to file several years ago.  Upon completion of the Bankruptcy, all
debt will be paid, discharged, or otherwise resolved.
Letters from Applicant’s attorney to various creditors confirm that some contact
was initiated.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)
  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
5
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
6
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that Applicant’s delinquent debts spiraled out of control in
2006 after his mother-in-law passed away.  Although they could not afford to do so, he
and his wife decided to take over their in-laws finances and real estate holdings.
Applicant had no experience in property management, did not know what to do when a
tenant failed to pay the rent, and did not have financial resources available to cover the
expenses.  As a result, they became excessively indebted.  They failed to pay the debts
7
and they remain owing.  On May 10, 2016, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy to
resolve his delinquent debts.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)       
Applicant’s history of excessive indebtedness, without sufficient mitigation,
demonstrates a pattern of unreliability and poor judgment.  Applicant provided some
proof of payment, and some documentation to demonstrate that he resolved some of
his delinquent debts.  However, the point here is that the Applicant has not shown that
he is reasonable, responsible or uses good judgment.  There is nothing in the record to
show that Applicant can live within his means.  Without more, the Applicant has failed to
establish that he is financially responsible.  There is evidence to show that Applicant has
received credit counseling.
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has not met his burden
of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  He does not have a concrete
understanding of his financial responsibilities and has not sufficiently addressed his
delinquent debts in the SOR.  His pattern of financial irresponsibility does not
demonstrate that he can properly handle his financial affairs.  His delinquent debts
remain significant.  Assuming that he demonstrates a history and pattern of fiscal
responsibility, including the fact he has not acquired any new debt that he is unable to
pay, he may be eligible for a security clearance sometime in the future.  However, he is
not eligible now.  Considering all of the evidence,  Applicant has not introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  It can be argued that Mitigation Condition 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances applies,
because of his mother-in-laws death.  However, this mitigation condition is not
controlling.  Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances.  He took on
financial obligations that were not his own, and fell behind on his own debts.  Applicant
could benefit from intense financial counseling. In this case, none of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
8
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
 Subpara.  1.a.      Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.b      Against the Applicant.
                     Subpara.  1.c.          Against the Applicant.
                 Subpara.  1.d.      Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.e Against the Applicant.
                     Subpara.  1.f.          Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.g.         Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.h.         Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.i.          Against the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
