                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
------------------------------------ )          ADP Case No. 15-01960   
                           )                                                          
                                                          )
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate trust concerns regarding her finances and her personal conduct. Eligibility
for holding a public trust position is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On September 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should
be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865 (E.O. 10865), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
1.  A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security,
titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,” covering the handling of trustworthiness cases under the
Directive was issued on November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed  DOHA to continue to utilize DOD
Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations (to include those involving ADP
I, II. and III positions). (HE 1) Parenthetically, the Directive was designed to implement E.O. 10865.
2
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 27, 2015, and requested a hearing.
This case was assigned to me on January 14, 2016. The case was scheduled for
hearing on April 27, 2016. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s eligibility to hold a public trust position. At the
hearing, the Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5); Applicant relied on
one witness (herself) and nine exhibits. (AEs A-I) The transcript was received on May
12, 2016. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Department Counsel, requested leave to submit
a summary of Applicant’s February 2013 interview with an agent of the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM). There being no objection from Applicant, and for good
cause shown, the Government’s OPM summary of interview was admitted as GE 6.
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record by kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with payment initiatives.  There
being no objection from Department Counsel, and for good cause shown, Applicant
was granted seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded
two days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with
a personal statement of actions taken, documented payments and payment
agreements. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs J-P.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accrued delinquent mortgage
payments of $1,233 on a total loan balance of $72,408 and (b) accumulated eight
delinquent consumer debts exceeding $24,000. Allegedly, these debts remain
outstanding. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) falsified her Electronic Questionnaires
for Electronic Processing (e-QIP) of December 6, 2012 by concealing her delinquent
debts covered by subparagraphs 1.c through 1.f of the SOR.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the allegations (creditors
1.b and 1.c), but denied each of the remaining allegations. She claimed she is a single,
working woman from a loving family, who was laid off from her previous employment in
3
2008 with no severance pay and only unemployment benefits to cover her expenses.
She claimed she has continued to struggle with her consumer debts while taking care of
her mortgage with her limited resources. She claimed she is exploring bankruptcy with a
bankruptcy attorney, but is not sure this is the route she wants to go. 
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 46-year-old team assistant for a military health organization who
seeks eligibility to hold a public trust position. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings
follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant has never married and has no children. She claimed no post-high-
school educational credits or military service. (GE 1) 
Applicant has worked for her current employer since December 2008 as a team
assistant. She listed unemployment between June 2008 and September 2008 in her e-
QIP, following a June 2008 layoff from her previous employer (a title company) where
she had worked for over three years. (GE 1) 
Applicant’s hearing claims of unemployment between 2007 and December 2008
(Tr. 29) are not reconcilable with the dates she provided in  her e-QIP, which provide a
better chronological employment history. Absent a more detailed explanation from
Applicant of the discrepancies in the dates of her work history, the listed  e-QIP dates of
employment and unemployment are accepted for employment tracking purposes.
Finances
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts between 2009 and 2015.
(GEs 2-5) These debts included a defaulted mortgage with a past-due balance of
$1,233 on a total loan balance of $72,408 and an additional seven delinquent debts
exceeding $20,000. (GEs 2-5) Applicant’s listed consumer debts are comprised of the
following: creditor 1.b ($9,449); creditor 1.c ($7,511); creditor 1.d ($1,504); creditor 1.e
($465); creditor 1.f ($1,850); creditor 1.g ($1,027); and creditor 1.h ($2,246).
Before her lay-off in 2008, Applicant enjoyed good credit. (AE B; Tr. 29) She
reported gross wages of $30,457 on her 2007 W-2 and just $13,042 on her 2008 W-2.
Her reported 2008 earnings marked a considerable reduction from her reported 2007
earnings. (AE C) Applicant attributed most of her debt delinquencies to her 2008 layoff
and ensuing unemployment (i.e., between June 2008 and September 2008), and low-
paying jobs before her layoff. (Answer and AEs C and D)  With little income to work with
during her three months of unemployment (relying on unemployment benefits), she
lacked the resources to address her old debts, some dating to 2009. (AE D Tr. 31) 
4
Since the issuance of the SOR, Applicant has made some progress with most of
the debts. Addressed debts include her creditor 1.a mortgage delinquency that she  has
brought into current status and avoided foreclosure. (AEs E, K-Q; Tr. 49-52)
Additionally, she documented payment in full of her creditor 1.f debt with a structured
settlement amount of $1,100. (AE K; Tr. 37) Her payment submissions document
payments on her creditor 1.d and 1.g debts with monthly payments of $50 and $25,
respectively. (AEs L and P). Applicant also provided payment updates on two non-SOR
debts. (AEs M, O, and Q) 
Still, Applicant has failed to address three of the largest delinquent debts
covered in the SOR. Her credit reports still reflect the lack of any payment initiatives
with creditors 1.b ($9,449 owing on a home equity account), creditor 1.c ($7,511 owing),
and creditor 1.e ($465 owing). (GEs 2-6 and AE B; Tr. 36-38, 43-44) Altogether, the
three remaining debts in the SOR that have not been addressed by Applicant total more
than $20,000.   
Applicant began her employment with her current employer in December 2008 at
an hourly rate of $19. (AE F) She made good progress with her employer, and by
February 2013, she was earning an annual salary of $31,200. (AE G) She currently
earns $42,061 a year with her employer, with reported bi-weekly net earnings of
$1,324. (AE H) Because her take-home pay has not been enough to address all of her
remaining debts, she briefly engaged a bankruptcy attorney in April 2016 to explore the
benefits of petitioning for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. (AE I; Tr. 25) She has since
expressed doubts about pursuing Chapter 7 relief, and to date has not sought Chapter
7 bankruptcy protection. (Tr. 25, 32-33)
Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling or budgeting since she
fell behind with her listed debts in 2008. She provided no specific financial plan for
repayment of her remaining three delinquent debts, which collectively exceed $20,000. 
Applicant’s s-QIP omissions. 
Asked to complete an e-QIP in December 2012, Applicant omitted several of her
delinquent debts listed in the SOR and covered by Section 26 of he e-QIP. In responding
to questions posed in Section 26 of the e-QIP about debts placed in collection, charged
off, cancelled, or which have been over 120 days delinquent, Applicant answered no to
every question posed. (GE 1; Tr. 41-42) Debts in serious delinquent status at the time
were the following: creditor 1.c (from March 2012); creditor 1.d (from October 2009);
creditor 1.e (from April 2011); and creditor 1.f (from August 2009)
Applicant provided conflicting reasons for her e-QIP omissions. Alternatively, she
claimed in her notarized answer that she was unaware of all of her delinquent debts, and
in her hearing testimony that she misread the questions. Her answers cannot be
reconciled and leave considerable doubts about her credibility. 
In a follow-up interview with an OPM agent in February 2013 (arranged through
her facility clearance officer), Applicant did not volunteer any other delinquent accounts
5
until she was shown a credit report by the interviewing OPM agent. (GE 6 and AE A; Tr
28-29, 47-48) Once she was shown her credit report and asked about her debts, she
acknowledged them with explanations. (GE 6; Tr. 47-48)  She offered no acceptable
reasons why she failed to list them in her e-QIP. Without more persuasive explanations
for her omissions of her SOR-covered debts in the e-QIP she completed in December
2012, inferences of knowing and wilful omission cannot be averted. 
Endorsements and Evaluations
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf.
Nor did she provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
{privacy] information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
trustworthiness concern [public trust position] and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate [trustworthiness
concerns].” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable public trust risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
6
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. . .  AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a public trust position depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain public trust position eligibility. The required materiality showing, however,
does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has
actually mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke
eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the
cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect
privacy information.
7
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of E.O. 10865 that all trustworthiness
determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility. “[T]rustworthiness]
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent consumer debts over a period of a number of years (some dating to 2009)
that she failed to address in material ways. Applicant’s recurrent problems with
managing her finances since becoming fully employed reflect lapses of judgment in
administering her financial responsibilities. Trust concerns are also raised with respect
to the omissions of her then delinquent debts in the e-QIP she completed in
December 2012. 
Financial Concerns
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulated debts covered
in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence,
§ 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed delinquent debts are fully
documented in her credit reports. Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s
insufficiently explained delinquent debts and her failure to demonstrate she acted
responsibly in addressing all of her listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App.
Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive
positions.” See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, ¶ ¶ C3, 1.2,
1.1.7, and C3. 1.2..3 (Jan. 1987, as amended) (the Regulation).  Holding a public trust
position involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, among which is the
expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the trust position. While the
principal concern of a trust position holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in
cases involving debt delinquencies.  
8
Although ADP I and ADP II positions are not expressly covered by E. O. 10865
or the Directive, which apply to contractor personnel, historically, the same principles
covering these positions have been applied in Regulation 5220.2 governing military
and civilian personnel. The definitions used in the Regulation to define ADP I and
ADP II positions have equal applicability to contractors covered by the Directive.
While some extenuating circumstances can be inferred from Applicant’s listed
periods of unemployment, too little information is documented to credit her with more
than partial extenuating circumstances. Based on the developed record, it is unclear
how her period of unemployment between June 2008 and September 2008 played
any significant role in her financial decision-making. Only recently did she bring her
mortgage account into current status, pay off her creditor 1.f debt, and arrange
modest payment plans with creditors 1.d and 1.g. To date, she has not provided any
evidence of good-faith payments or payment plans on her remaining debts, which are
substantial in both number and amount. 
Further, Applicant provided no documented follow-up to her expressed
commitments to work with the remaining listed creditors to pay off the remaining
balances. Considering the available documented evidence, extenuating
circumstances in this record are quite limited. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly.” 
Applicant’s payment efforts also lack payment proof. Her payment claims with
her creditors contain only limited documented proof and have not resulted in any
documented payoffs or resolution of any of her remaining listed debts. Without
documentation of financial counseling and more specific corrective steps that
Applicant is taking to address her outstanding debts, little mitigation credit is available
to her. Based on the documented evidence in the record, none of the remaining
mitigation conditions apply to Applicant’s situation.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her failure to take more concerted steps to resolve her
delinquent debts. Resolution of her listed delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite
to her regaining control of her finances. Applicant failed to provide more specific
explanatory material for consideration. Endorsements and performance evaluations
might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of her overall
trustworthiness, but were not provided. 
Overall, public trust eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable her to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome trust concerns arising out of
her lapses in judgment associated with her accumulation of delinquent debts, some of
which date to 2009.  Most of her listed debts remain outstanding, with no developed
payment plan for resolving them.
9
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s lack of more specific explanations for her debt accruals and evidence of
payments made on her remaining listed debts, it is still too soon to make safe
predictive judgments about her ability to resolve her outstanding debts. Applicant fails
to mitigate trust concerns related to her outstanding debt delinquencies and
associated judgment lapses. More time is needed to facilitate Applicant’s
documenting the necessary progress with her debts to enable conclusions that her
finances are sufficiently stabilized to grant her eligibility to hold a public trust position.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.b through 1.c, 1.e through 1.f, and 1.h. Applicant is entitled to
favorable conclusions with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a,
1.d, and 1.g.   
Personal Conduct concerns
Trustworthiness concerns are raised as well over Applicant’s failure to list her
known delinquent debts in her 2012 security clearance application (i.e., creditors 1.c-
1.f). Such concerns are raised when an applicant has committed conduct that reflects
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations.
Looking at the developed facts and circumstances in this case, two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) under the personal conduct guideline apply to
Applicant’s  situation. DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts to any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications,
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or
award fiduciary responsibilities,” and DC ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” DC
¶ 16(a) applies to Applicant’s 2012 e-QIP omissions. 
While Applicant was not forthcoming with her delinquent debts in her ensuing
2013 OPM before she was confronted with a credit report, the SOR contains no
allegations of Applicant falsification in her OPM interview. Still, DC ¶ 16(b) has some
application to Applicant’s situation. Because she denied being confronted by the OPM
agent with her delinquent debts before she disclosed them, both her credibility and
the quality of her extenuating circumstances and mitigation efforts are placed in issue.
See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citing five circumstances
in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to access an
applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation,
mitigation, or changed circumstances: (c) to consider whether an applicant has
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or  (e) to provide evidence for whole person.
Most of these cited circumstances apply to the facts in Applicant’s case.
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, Applicant’s omissions of her
then known delinquent debts in the e-QIP she completed in December 2012 are
10
difficult to reconcile with her conflicting explanations of her omissions when asked
about her delinquent debts in her e-QIP. Afforded an opportunity to correct her
omissions in her follow-up OPM interview in 2013, she failed to provide any evidence
of voluntary corrections before she was confronted with her listed delinquent accounts
by the interviewing agent. Considering all of the circumstances, Applicant is not
entitled to any of the benefits of the mitigating conditions of Guideline E. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant’s overall efforts are not sufficient
to extenuate or mitigate questions about her demonstrated honesty and integrity
arising from her e-QIP omissions and ensuing OPM interview before she was
confronted. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted re: the allegations covered by
Guideline E.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.b-1.c, 1.e-1.f, and 1.h:      Against Applicant
                                               
Subparas. 1.a, 1.d, and 1.g:                 For Applicant 
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT)               AGAINST APPLICANT
   Subpara. 2.a:                           Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
11
  
