 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02961 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 17, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on January 25, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on February 9, 2016. As of April 4, 2016, she had not 
 
2 
responded. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2016. The Government exhibits 
included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since October 2014. She is seeking eligibility to hold a public trust 
position. She has associate’s degrees that were awarded in 2003 and 2014. She has 
never married and she has no children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges 31 delinquent debts. However, the following debts are 
duplicates: SOR ¶¶ 1.a (no balance alleged) and 1.z ($3,185); 1.s ($1,595) and 1.y 
($1,962); and 1.x ($372) and 1.aa ($574). There may be additional duplicate debts that 
are not obvious from the evidence. The balances of the debts range from $27 owed on 
a mail-order food account to $3,185 owed to a bank. Applicant admitted owing all of the 
debts alleged in the SOR, but the $553 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ee was listed in the 
September 2014 credit report with a $0 balance and the annotation: “Account legally 
paid in full for less than the full balance.” The date of last action was December 2013.2 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. She reported her delinquent debts when she submitted a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in September 2014. She 
discussed her finances during her background interview in November 2014. She had 
only recently been hired by her current employer. She stated that she would make 
arrangements to pay her accounts after she started receiving a steady paycheck.3 
 
 When she responded to the SOR, Applicant stated that she had been unable to 
start repaying her debts because of additional circumstances, which included broken 
appliances that required replacing; repairs to the vehicle that she drives (her father’s 20-
year-old pickup truck); $4,700 toward necessary dental work; and expenses related to 
caring for her elderly and ill father. She also noted that she missed substantial time at 
work and overtime because of her dental procedures and taking her father to his 
medical appointments. Her medical insurance costs $280 per month, and her monthly 
student loan payment is $390. She realizes that she needs to file for bankruptcy 
protection or pay her debts, but she has not had the money to do either. She did not 
respond to the FORM, so no additional information was provided after her December 
2015 response to the SOR.4 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4. 
 
2 Items 2-6. 
 
3 Items 2-4. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
3 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable to pay her financial 
obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.z; 1.s and 1.y; and 1.x and 1.aa are duplicates. When the 
same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the 
duplicate allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-
04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.s, and 
1.x are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment, underemployment, broken appliances and pickup 
truck, dental work, and expenses related to caring for her elderly and ill father were all 
beyond her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 With the possible exception of the $553 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ee, which may 
have been settled in December 2013, Applicant has not paid any of the debts alleged in 
the SOR, including the $27 owed on a mail-order food account. During her background 
interview in November 2014, she stated that she would make arrangements to pay her 
accounts after she started receiving a steady paycheck. The Appeal Board has held that 
“intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt 
repayment or other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
 There is a lack of evidence in the record about how and when Applicant will 
address her finances. I am unable to find that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. Her financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
6 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the factors that led to Applicant’s financial difficulties. However, the 
limited information in the record has not convinced me Applicant has a viable plan to 
address her finances. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t-1.w:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.x:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.y-1.dd:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.ee:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
