 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-02827 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by delinquent debt that he incurred 
during a two-year period of unstable employment. After being by hired his current 
employer, Applicant began responsibly addressing his trouble finances. He provided 
documentation showing a track record of debt repayments spanning a period of over 
three years, and the record evidence reflects he has not accumulated other delinquent 
debt since being hired by his current employer. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a determination based on the 
administrative (written) record.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On November 21, 2016, Department Counsel prepared the Government’s written 
case, a file of relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains 
the pleadings, administrative documents, and four documentary exhibits, which were 
pre-marked Items 1 – 8. Without objection, Items 1 – 8 were admitted into the record.  
 
Applicant filed a response to the FORM (Response). Applicant submitted a 
number of state and federal tax records with his Response. Applicant’s Response and 
attached documents were collectively marked Exhibit A and, without objection, admitted 
into the record. On August 11, 2016, I was assigned Applicant’s case for decision.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 46, worked for his brother’s construction company from 2001 to 
August 2012. He was an independent contractor (a 1099 employee). His brother was 
routinely late in providing the necessary tax documents, which negatively impacted 
Applicant’s ability to timely file his tax returns. Also, in approximately 2011, the business 
suffered a severe downturn. Applicant found himself without work for weeks at a time 
and his income decreased significantly. His IRS account transcripts reflect that his 
adjusted gross income for 2010 was approximately $69,000, which dropped by $25,000 
in 2011. His income in 2012 was $11,000 less than it had been in 2010. (Exhibit A) 
 
Applicant and his wife, who have been married for nearly 10 years, had their first 
child around the same time the construction business started experiencing financial 
problems. The added child care expenses further deepened Applicant’s already 
troubled financial situation.  
 
 Applicant decided to return to school to improve his job prospects. He earned his 
GED in 2011, and was hired by his current employer in August 2012. He submitted a 
security clearance application (SCA) in January 2013, in connection with his job as a 
federal contractor. He voluntarily disclosed his failure to file federal and state tax returns 
for a number of years. Applicant explained that he could not afford to pay his accountant 
to prepare and file his returns. He also disclosed a number of debts that had become 
delinquent. Applicant stated that he had hired a new accountant and was in the process 
of filing his overdue tax returns and negotiating an installment agreement. (Item 5) 
 
 In April 2013, Applicant filed his federal and state tax returns for tax years 2009 
through 2012. He also established an installment agreement with the IRS to pay his 
overdue taxes. His IRS account transcripts for 2009 through 2012 reflect a $0 balance. 
Applicant paid his federal tax debt through a combination of consistent monthly 
installment payments and credits for substantial refunds he was owed. Applicant 
increased his tax withholdings to more quickly satisfy the federal tax debt. Applicant 
also submitted documentation showing that he filed his overdue state tax returns and 
paid his state tax debt. (Exhibit A)  
 
                                                          
2 Administrative documents, including confirmation that Applicant is still being sponsored for a clearance, 
were collectively marked and attached to the record as Appellant Exhibit I.  
 
3 
 
 
The SOR references at 1.a – 1.c Applicant’s past tax issues, which have now 
been resolved. The SOR also lists four delinquent consumer-related debts at 1.d 
through 1.g. A review of credit reports submitted with the FORM establishes that the 
accounts listed in SOR 1.d and 1.g are for the same debt. The creditor listed in 1.d is 
the firm collecting the delinquent debt for the original creditor listed in 1.g. The 
remaining three SOR debts total about $8,000. Two of the debts (1.d and 1.e), which 
constitute the bulk of the outstanding debt load, are credit cards that became delinquent 
when Applicant suffered a significant reduction in income. He disclosed these debts on 
his SCA and now that he has resolved his past tax issues he has contacted these 
creditors to pay these debts. He has not accumulated other delinquent debt since being 
hired by his current employer in August 2012.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
 
4 
 
 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an individual with financial problems might be tempted to compromise 
classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses 
the extent to which an individual’s delinquent debts cast doubt upon their judgment, self-
control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.3 
 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debt implicates the financial 
considerations security concern. The record evidence also raises the disqualifying 
conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), 
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
Additionally, Applicant’s failure to timely file his 2009 through 2011 tax returns 
raises the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” Due to 
his past failure to timely file and pay his taxes, Applicant bears a heavy burden in 
mitigating the financial considerations security concern.4  
 
 The guideline lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. The 
following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
4 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues, as follows:  “A security clearance represents an 
obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor 
other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection process. Instead, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles their financial obligations to 
make a predictive judgment about how they will handle their security obligations.5 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance was called into question by the evidence 
submitted by the Government showing the accumulation of delinquent debt. 
Furthermore, Applicant’s failure to timely file and pay his taxes raises heightened 
security concerns about his judgment and ability to abide by rules and regulations, 
requiring a closer examination regarding the circumstances giving rise to the tax issues 
and his response to it. 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were, in part, due to matters beyond his 
control, notably, unstable employment when his brother’s business suffered a business 
downturn. He did not sit idly by as his financial situation worsened. Instead, at a 
relatively advanced age, he returned to school around the time he was unable to attain 
full-time construction work and earned his GED. Applicant, with his newly-earned GED 
in hand, was then able to obtain his present job. He then filed his overdue tax returns 
and paid his tax debt. He did so through a demonstrated track record of debt 
repayment. He filed his overdue federal tax returns and entered into an installment 
agreement with the IRS in April 2013, or two and half years before the SOR was issued. 
He has not accrued other past-due debt since being hired by his current employer four 
years ago. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply.  
 
 Applicant’s past tax issues were not due to procrastination,6 indifference, or 
intentional refusal to comply with tax laws.7 Instead, his past financial problems were 
                                                          
5 See also, ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are 
not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that 
person's past conduct and present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529). 
 
6 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016).  
 
6 
 
 
primarily caused by unemployment and underemployment. After obtaining his current 
job, Applicant hired an accountant, filed his overdue tax returns, negotiated an 
installment agreement with the IRS, and fully satisfied his tax debt. Although he still has 
some past-due, consumer-related debt that he incurred during this recent period of 
financial instability, it is reasonable to surmise based on his track record of over three 
years of debt repayment that he will continue to address his past financial problems and 
manage his finances in a responsible manner.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they manage their 
current finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified 
information.8 After considering all the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, as well 
as the whole-person factors,9 I find that Applicant met his heavy burden of proof and 
persuasion in mitigating security concerns raised by his past financial circumstances 
and established his present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
7 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999).  
 
8 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
9 See, AG ¶ 2(a).  
