 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01011 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 1, 2015 and June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2016, and June 21, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 2, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on June 2, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 21, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant 
to submit additional documents, which he did, and they were marked AE B and C. 
There was no objection, and the documents were admitted into evidence. On August 2, 
2016, I extended the period to submit additional documents until August 12, 2016. 
Applicant submitted AE D through H, and the record closed.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.g. The request was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation SOR ¶ 1.a and denied the remaining 
allegations with explanations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He graduated from high school, served in the military 
from 1990 to 1996, and was honorably discharged. He married in 1995 and divorced in 
2011. He has two children from the marriage ages 18 and 14, who reside with him. He 
does not receive child support. He remarried in 2012 and divorced in January 2016. He 
has worked for his present employer since 2005.2  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his two divorces. His first wife and 
he owned a home. He was current with his mortgage payments and was attempting to 
remove his wife’s name from the loan when they divorced. He attempted to refinance 
the loan, but the mortgage lender advised him he would not be able to refinance or 
obtain a loan modification unless he was behind in his mortgage payments. He was 
advised to not pay his mortgage for a couple of months, which would force a short sale 
of the house. He followed this advice and eventually was able to resolve the home 
mortgage through a short sale in April 2015.3  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($9,553) was for a credit card that belonged to Applicant’s 
first wife, and he was an authorized user. He testified that in 2011, he negotiated a 
settlement and paid $5,000. In Applicant’s post-hearing submission, he provided a copy 
of a June 2016 credit report that lists Applicant as an “authorized user” on the account. 
He also provided a letter from the creditor indicating he is removed from an account with 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a copy of Department Counsel’s discovery letter sent to Applicant. HE II is 
Department Counsel’s memorandum indicating she did not object to Applicant’s post-hearing 
submissions. 
 
2 Tr. 24-26. 
 
3 Tr. 27-32. 
 
3 
 
 
this creditor, but the account number is different than the one alleged. The debt is 
resolved.4 
 
 Applicant experienced tax problems in 2009 after he withdrew money from his 
retirement account to pay bills and pay off the loan on his truck. He gave the truck to his 
first wife. He indicated that the penalty incurred for the withdrawal was offset by the tax 
refund he was entitled to receive. He further indicated that he and his wife made the 
mistake of both claiming their children as their dependents on their separate tax returns. 
They did not learn of the problem until 2011. Applicant had custody of the children. In 
2012, he hired an accounting firm to help him resolve his tax issues. He disclosed his 
tax issues on his SCA and later to a government investigator. Applicant testified that the 
taxes owed have been paid and the issue is resolved. He indicated he contacted the 
Internal Revenue Service and was advised he did not owe any delinquent taxes and 
has a zero balance. After his hearing, Applicant provided a statement that he 
reconfirmed with the IRS that he does not have a tax debt, but he was unable at that 
time to provide a statement indicating such. None of the credit reports list a tax lien.5  
 
 Applicant and his second wife separated in August 2014, and he continued to 
pay $2,100 a month for her rent for the home she lived in until she moved in February 
2015. He was paying his own monthly rent of $1,600 for an apartment at the same time. 
He had difficulty maintaining two households. Applicant and his second wife entered 
into a mediated settlement agreement in August 2015. It was agreed that Applicant 
would pay his wife’s residential rent of $1,479 a month through July 2016.6 He provided 
his wife extra money in October 2015. His wife received their joint tax refund of $13,000 
in 2014 and $12,000 in 2015. Applicant indicated once the spousal support obligation 
concluded he anticipated being more financially stable.7  
  
 Applicant testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($4,558) was for equipment he 
failed to return to a communications company. Applicant settled the debt in July 2016 
and it is resolved.8 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e are for medical services. Applicant 
indicated that after he and his second wife separated he was required to maintain 
                                                          
4 Tr. 31-33, 55-59, AE C, E. Applicant’s mediated settlement agreement in AE A indicates that there are 
no joint credit cards and each party is responsible for their own credit card debts without contribution from 
the other party. 
 
5 Tr. 67-77; GE 1, 2, 3, 4; AE C, H. 
 
6 Tr. 37-39, 59-63; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. 27, 33, 37; AE D. 
 
8 Tr. 35-36, 45-49. 
 
 
4 
 
 
medical insurance on her children for a period. These medical bills were for her 
children. He paid the bills in July 2016 and provided documented proof.9 
 
 Applicant testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($450) was a cable bill that was for 
services in the house where his second wife lived. He paid the debt in September 2015. 
Applicant testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($233) is paid. It is no longer listed on his 
most current credit report. He indicated that the creditor advised him it does not have an 
open account in his name and would not provide him a letter. The debt is resolved.10 
 
 Applicant continues to provide support to his 18-year-old daughter who lives at 
home and attends college. Applicant does not have other delinquent accounts. He is 
able to meet his monthly expenses and was able to resolve his delinquent debts once 
he no longer had any financial obligations to his ex-wives.11  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
9 Tr. 36-37, 49-54; AE F. 
 
10 T. 39-44, 54-55; AE C, H. 
 
11 Tr. 34, 82. 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had debts that were unpaid or unresolved for several years. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were attributed to his divorces and spousal 
support he was required to pay. His spousal support obligation recently terminated, and 
he has addressed his delinquent debts. I found his testimony credible that he has 
worked with an accounting firm to resolve his tax issues and that he contacted the IRS 
and was advised he has a zero tax balance. I find there is sufficient evidence to 
conclude that his conduct is unlikely to recur, happened under unique circumstances 
and it does not cast doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) apply.  
 
 For the application of AG ¶ 20(b), there must be conditions that were beyond 
Applicant’s control that resulted in the financial hardship. Applicant provided sufficient 
evidence to conclude his divorces and his spousal support obligation negatively 
impacted his finances and was beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant provided evidence that he acted 
 
7 
 
 
responsibly by complying with his spousal support obligation and when he was 
financially able, resolving his delinquent debts. AG 20(b) applies. 
 
 There is evidence Applicant has resolved his delinquent debt and that he is not 
responsible for one of them. Applicant began working with an accountant in 2012 to 
resolve his tax issues. He did not ignore his responsibility, but due to his divorce he was 
attempting to have the taxes filed correctly. Under the circumstances, I find there are 
clear indications his financial problems are being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. I find 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies to those debts he has paid. Although Applicant did not provide documentary 
proof about the resolution of his tax debt, he disclosed on his SCA that he had some 
issues with his taxes due to his divorce and later disclosed to a government investigator 
that he was working with an accounting firm to resolve the tax issues. He believed his 
tax debts were resolved. He has been in contact with the IRS and was advised that he 
does not have an outstanding balance.  
 
 Applicant disputed that he was responsible for the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.f 
and provided a letter from the creditor acknowledging he was an authorized user and 
confirming he was not responsible for the debt. AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He has had custody of his children and did not receive 
child support. He has complied with a spousal support order that negatively impacted 
his finances. Since the termination of his spousal support obligation he has resolved his 
delinquent debts. Applicant has met his burden of persuasion, and I find the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
