 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ADP Case No. 15-04099 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 28, 2014, Applicant applied for a public trust position and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On December 7, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended and modified 
(Regulation); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged trustworthiness concerns 
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed 
                                                          
 
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated August 28, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to make an affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a contract 
with the DOD. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether such eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated January 13, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 However, on February 17, 2016, pursuant to ¶ E3.1.7 of the Additional 
Procedural Guidance of Enclosure 3, of the Directive, Department Counsel requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.3 On March 8, 2016, Department Counsel 
indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to me on 
April 21, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on May 9, 2016. I convened the hearing, 
as scheduled, on May 18, 2016.  
 
 During the hearing, five Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5), six Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE F), and two administrative exhibits, were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 
26, 2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took 
advantage of that opportunity. She timely submitted a number of additional documents, 
which were marked as AE G and AE H, and admitted into evidence without objection. 
The record closed on June 15, 2016. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied, with comments, both the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶ 1.a.) as well as the factual 
allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 2.a.) of the SOR. Applicant’s comments 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a full-
time claims examiner for a defense contractor since May 1989.4 She is seeking to retain 
her eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a contract with the DOD. 
She has never served in the U.S. military.5 She is a 1987 high school graduate with 
some college credits, but no degree.6 Applicant was married in 1988.7 She has one 
daughter, born in 1988, and one son, born in 1990.8 
                                                          
2
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 13, 2016). 
 
3
 Administrative Exhibit I (Letter, dated February 17, 2016). 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 11. 
 
6
 Tr. at 28. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations9 
 
A review of Applicant’s September 2014 credit report reveals only one past-due 
account, and it pertains to a bank home mortgage account (with bank A) with a high 
credit of $328,375, a past-due balance of $93,642, and an unpaid balance of $318,182, 
that was placed for collection upon becoming 180 days past due in 2014. Foreclosure 
proceedings were initiated (SOR ¶ 1.a.).10 All of the remaining active accounts were 
listed as current. A review of Applicant’s November 2015 credit report reveals two 
“snapshot” listings of the same account with the same bank (bank A) and with a 
mortgage lender, both of which reflect a zero balance and nothing past due. The listing 
for the bank (bank A) notes that the account was transferred or sold.11 All of the 
remaining active accounts were listed as current.  
 
There is some confusion regarding the actual status of the mortgage account. 
Applicant contended on the date of the hearing in May 2016 that she was still residing in 
the residence and still paying property taxes.12 She also received a Form 1098, 
Mortgage Interest Statement, for 2015 which reflected that she had paid $1,206.53 in 
second mortgage interest during 2015.13 According to extracts of an October 2015 
TransUnion credit report and an undated Equifax credit report, Applicant made her last 
payment to a subsidiary of bank A (bank B) on August 15, 2011.14 Foreclosure was 
supposedly initiated at some point before May 2013, and the account was transferred to 
another office or another lender in April 2015.15 As of April 2015, there was no balance 
owed to either bank A or bank B.16 An extract of a September 2015 Experian credit 
report supplements that scenario. Applicant’s account with bank A was in a current 
status through June 2009. It went into a delinquent status of between 60 and 180 days 
past due until July 2013 when foreclosure proceedings commenced. The account was 
closed in May 2015, and the account was transferred to another lender.17  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
9
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits:  GE 2 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 11, 2014); 
GE 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated November 24, 2015); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. More recent 
information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
10
 GE 2, supra note 9, at 6. 
 
11
 GE 3, supra note 9, at 4. 
 
12
 Tr. at 39-40; AE F (Tax Notice – Real Property Taxes, dated September 19, 2015). 
 
13
 AE G (Statement, dated June 3, 2016); AE H (Form 1098, undated). 
 
14
 AE C (Extract of TransUnion Credit Report, dated October 29, 2015); AE D (extract of Equifax Credit 
Report, undated). 
 
15
 AE C, supra note 14. 
 
16
 AE C, supra note 14; AE D, supra note 14. 
 
17
 AE E (Extract of Experian Credit Report, dated September 1, 2015). 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant was sued in a foreclosure action on October 18, 2011. According to a 
July 2014 Memorandum of Law in Support of Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment 
in the foreclosure action brought by bank A, as a successor to bank B, formerly known 
as bank C, against Applicant, her husband, her second mortgage holder, and 
Applicant’s homeowners association. Applicant had purchased her residence on July 
31, 2008 with a mortgage in the amount of $328,375 from mortgage lender D. In June 
2011, the mortgage was assigned to bank B. Monthly mortgage payments supposedly 
ceased and the mortgage went into a default status in June 2011.18 On February 28, 
2014, the court issued a foreclosure judgment.19 On October 22, 2014, an Order 
Denying Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment as to Damage was issued. It noted 
two important factors: (1) the evidence on file failed to show that there is no genuine 
issue as to any material fact; and (2) the plaintiff had not established that the 
defendants were delinquent on the mortgage at the time the action was commenced.20 
On March 2015, a foreclosure judgment was issued.21 No deficiency damage amounts 
were awarded to any of the named plaintiffs.22 There is no evidence of an appeal being 
made by the plaintiffs. Applicant filed a motion for a new trial, a relief from judgment, 
and a stay of sale.23 The results of her efforts were not reflected in the court file, but on 
July 21, 2015, bank A filed a notice for a foreclosure sale.24 A foreclosure sale was held 
on August 3, 2015, and the property was sold for $300,000. The foreclosure deed was 
issued on October 16, 2015.25  
 
Applicant is insistent that she or her husband makes mortgage payments to her 
credit union.26 That credit union happens to be the holder of her second mortgage. 
When asked if she was aware that she had both a first and a second mortgage, 
Applicant was not sure because her husband handles “all of that.”27 She subsequently 
acknowledged that the credit union held her second mortgage.28 She also stated that at 
some point bank A refused her monthly payments because of the pending foreclosure 
litigation.29 Applicant was asked to furnish documentation from her checking account, 
bank A, her credit union, and her income tax records to support her contentions that 
                                                          
18
 AE A (Memorandum of Law in Support of Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment, dated July 30, 2014). 
 
19
 GE 4 (Court Public Index, dated March 8, 2016), at 1. 
 
20
 AE B (Order Denying Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment, dated October 22, 2014). 
 
21
 GE 5 (Foreclosure Deed, dated October 16, 2015), at 1. 
 
22
 GE 4, supra note 19, at 1-2. 
 
23
 GE 4, supra note 19, at 1. 
 
24
 GE 4, supra note 19, at 1. 
 
25
 GE 5, supra note 21. 
 
26
 Tr. at 40. 
 
27
 Tr. at 43, 62-63, 66. 
 
28
 AE G, supra note 13. 
 
29
 Tr. at 54-55. 
 
5 
                                      
 
payments were being made or rejected.30 She subsequently responded that bank A no 
longer exists in her town and the successor bank does not have any of the requested 
bank records; that her husband, an individual on disability since approximately 2008 or 
2009,31 and she have a joint account; and he “forbids” Applicant from furnishing any of 
his personal banking information and assets.32 In complying with her husband’s order, 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation to support her contention that mortgage 
payments were made related to her first mortgage or that bank A refused to accept her 
mortgage payments. She denied ever receiving a Form 1099-A, Acquisition or 
Abandonment of Secured Property, or Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt.33  
Department Counsel has argued that because the unpaid balance allegedly 
owed to the mortgage lender and its various alter-egos was $328,000, and the 
residence sold for $300,000, there was a deficiency of $28,000 that was still owed by 
Applicant.34 That is inaccurate. Under the law of the state in which the property was 
located and the court foreclosure order was issued, a mortgage lender must sue a 
delinquent borrower to obtain a foreclosure. A mortgage lender intending to pursue a 
deficiency judgment must do so as part of the foreclosure lawsuit. The complaint should 
contain language that indicates the mortgage lender is either waiving or reserving the 
right to a deficiency judgment. If the mortgage lender waives the right to a deficiency 
judgment, the mortgage lender cannot later sue the borrower to recover the 
deficiency.35 As noted above, no deficiency damage amounts were awarded by the 
court to any of the named plaintiffs. 
Because of her husband’s refusal to permit Applicant to disclose family financial 
information, she failed to submit a personal financial statement indicating her net 
monthly income and her husband’s monthly disability payments; her normal monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder available for saving or spending. Nevertheless, in 
the absence of any additional delinquent accounts, it appears that Applicant's financial 
problems are under control.  
Personal Conduct 
 On August 28, 2014, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she responded to 
questions pertaining to her financial record. Several of those questions in Section 26 – 
Financial Record – asked if, in the past seven years, she had been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt not previously entered; or if she was currently over 120 days 
                                                          
 
30
 Tr. at 55-57. 
 
31
 Tr. at 31. 
 
32
 AE G, supra note 13. 
 
33
 Tr. at 41, 44-45, 60, 65, 69. 
 
34
 Tr. at 68.  
 
35
 S.C. Code Ann. § 29-3-660; S.C. Rules Civ. Proc. Rule 71(b). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” to those questions. She certified that 
the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge and 
belief,36 but the response to those questions may have been, in fact, incorrect, for at 
that time Applicant had a mortgage account that may have fallen within the stated 
parameters. Applicant has been steadfast in her denial that she was delinquent in her 
mortgage payments, and she contended that although bank A claimed she was, she 
disputed that issue, and they were in litigation in an effort to correct the record and have 
her credit report updated.37  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [position of public trust].”38 As Commander in 
Chief, the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on 
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to 
have access to such information. Positions designated as ADP-I and ADP-II are 
classified as “sensitive positions.”39 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment 
to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, 
reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”40 Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made.41  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
                                                          
36
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 26-27, 30. 
 
37
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2, at 1-2; Tr. at 17, 60-62. 
 
38
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
39
 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, and C3.1.2.2. See also Regulation app. 10, ¶ 10.2. It should be 
noted that a memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security, 
Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases, dated November 19, 2004, covers the handling of trustworthiness cases 
under the Directive. The memorandum directed DOHA to continue to utilize the Directive in ADP contractor cases for 
trustworthiness determinations. 
 
40
 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
41
 Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”42 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.43  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
Furthermore, security clearance determinations, and by inference, public trust 
determinations, should err, if they must, on the side of denials.44 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
42
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
43
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
44
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
Under AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying. Also, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise trustworthiness concerns. Applicant’s sole financial problems supposedly 
arose in June 2011, the same time that her home mortgage was assigned from bank A 
to bank B.  The mortgage lender and its various alter-egos denied receiving any further 
mortgage payments, but Applicant contended that such payments were being made by 
her or her husband to her credit union, the holder of her second mortgage. Despite her 
protestations, a foreclosure ensued and the residence was sold. Applicant failed to 
submit documentation to support her contentions regarding her continuing payments. 
There is no evidence of any other delinquent debts. Under these disputed 
circumstances, there is no evidence of an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
AG ¶ 19(a) has not been established. However, because the foreclosure was ordered 
by the court and the house was sold, AG ¶ 19(c) has been established.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 20(b), financial trustworthiness concerns may be mitigated 
where “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”45 In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply 
                                                          
45
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) partially apply. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
The nature of Applicant’s financial dispute with her mortgage lender and its various 
alter-egos from 2011 until 2015 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur. When the foreclosure was ordered and the house was sold without any 
deficiency, the problem was finally resolved and it is now under control. In the absence 
of documentation reflecting Applicant’s mortgage payments, there is, however, evidence 
of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to resolve her mortgage situation in court. Contending 
that she had continued making her mortgage payments, Applicant had a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the alleged past-due debt which is the sole basis of 
the dispute. There is little evidence articulated that indicates the dispute was in some 
way beyond Applicant’s control. She either made her mortgage payments or she did 
not, and the best evidence in resolving the issue is documentation in the form of 
cancelled checks, bank records, and receipts, none of which was offered.  
 
The sole alleged debt in the SOR was resolved in March 2015, approximately 
nine months before the SOR was issued – a fact that should have been known to the 
DOD CAF. The SOR allegation states that as of the date of the SOR, the account 
“remains delinquent,” but the Government’s own evidence (the September 2014 credit 
report, the November 2015 credit report, and the court records) reflect no further 
financial liability by Applicant. The residence was foreclosed in March 2015 and sold in 
August 2015, and the debt was wiped out. In the absence of any other financial 
delinquencies, Applicant's finances are under control. Her actions do not cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the [trustworthiness eligibility] process or any 
other failure to cooperate with the [trustworthiness eligibility] process.  
 
 The guideline notes a condition that could raise trustworthiness concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
10 
                                      
 
 On August 28, 2014, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she responded to 
questions pertaining to her financial record. Several of those questions in Section 26 – 
Financial Record – asked if, in the past seven years, she had been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt not previously entered; or if she was currently over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” to those questions. She certified that 
the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge and 
belief, but the response to those questions may have been, in fact, incorrect, for at that 
time Applicant had a mortgage account that may have fallen within the stated 
parameters. Applicant has been steadfast in her denial that she was delinquent in her 
mortgage payments, and she contended that although her mortgage lender claimed she 
was, she disputed that issue, and they were in litigation in an effort to correct the record 
and have her credit report updated.  
 
 Applicant’s response provides sufficient evidence to examine if her submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of oversight or 
misunderstanding of the true facts on her part. Proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the falsification 
or omission occurred. As administrative judge, I must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning 
Appellant’s intent or state of mind at the time the alleged falsification or omission 
occurred.46 I have considered the entire record, including the absence of other 
delinquent accounts; her lengthy efforts to correct what she considered false information 
promoted by her mortgage lender; her steadfast insistence that she was making her 
mortgage payments; and her denial that she had falsified her response. I have 
concluded that her response as to the financial record is accurate and consistent with 
her true belief as to the financial situation. AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
46
 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.47   
     
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She unwisely left 
her husband in substantial charge of the family finances, and she foolishly submitted to 
his refusal to allow her to submit documentation to me related to family finances. His 
actions raise suspicions regarding his purported mortgage payments and current family 
assets. Despite her efforts, the mortgage lender and its various alter-egos was 
successful in foreclosing on her residence and having it sold.  
 
 The mitigating evidence is more substantial and compelling. There is no 
evidence of misuse of information technology systems, mishandling protected 
information, or substance abuse. Applicant has been an employee for the same defense 
contractor since May 1989. Other than the one mortgage issue, Applicant’s finances are 
in good order with no delinquent accounts, and they reflect her fiscal responsibility. The 
one SOR financial issue was resolved approximately nine months before the SOR was 
issued. There is no continuing financial responsibility associated with any deficiency. I 
conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s finances are under control. 
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial 
considerations and personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
  
                                                          
47
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position to support a contract with DOD.  Eligibility is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
  
