 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02114 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 10) He was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on November 20, 2007. 
(Item 12) Based on the OPM investigation, Applicant was granted eligibility for access to 
classified information. On December 6, 2012, Applicant submitted a new e-QIP to retain 
his security clearance. (Item 5) He was interviewed by an OPM security investigator on 
January 22, 2013. (Item 9) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. On November 1, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations under 
 
2 
 
 
Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015. He admitted two and 
denied five of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He elected to have the matter 
decided on the written record. (Item 4) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on February 22, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on March 4, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant filed a timely reply to the FORM on April 3, 2016. (Item 13) I was 
assigned the case on June 9, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 9) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI. Applicant did not object to the admission of the PSI when he responded to 
the FORM. He has waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI. I will consider 
information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file. I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 58-years-old. He married in September 1997 and has two children. 
He received an associate’s degree in 1979 and a bachelor’s degree in December 1981. 
He was employed in various engineering positions until he was unemployed from 
September 2000 until January 2001. From January 2001 until January 2002, he was 
employed as an aviation engineer by a defense contractor. In January 2002, he started 
working for his present defense contractor employer as an aviation engineer. He has 
held various aviation engineering positions with the same company since January 2002. 
(Item 5, e-QIP, dated December 6, 2012; Item 9, PSI, dated January 22, 2013)  
 
The SOR lists and credit reports (Item 6, dated February 12, 2016; Item 7, dated 
February 21, 2015; and Item 8, dated December 12, 2012) confirm the following 
financial security concerns for Applicant: failure to file federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2010 and 2011 (SOR 1.a); failure to submit state business tax 
forms for 2000 and 2001 (SOR 1.b); a state tax debt for 2000 and 2001 (SOR 1.c); a 
 
3 
 
 
credit card debt for $60 (SOR 1.d); and three medical delinquent debts for $451 (SOR 
1.e), $223 (SOR 1.f), and $210 (SOR 1.g). The delinquent debts total approximately 
$1,000.  
 
Applicant reported the failure to file his federal and state tax returns for 2010 and 
2011 on his e-QIP. He attributed his failure to timely file his tax returns to the 
unavailability of his financial records for this period. He also believed that he had time to 
file the returns since he was anticipating a refund. He also reported a lien that was not 
included in the SOR and has been satisfied. (Item 5, e-QIP, dated December 6, 2012) 
 
Applicant provided sufficient documents to establish that the state and federal 
taxes returns for 2010 and 2011 have been filed. (SOR 1.a) Applicant was able to 
gather the records he needed to file his federal and state tax returns for the tax years in 
question. He employed a certified public accountant (CPA) to assist him in preparing 
and filing his tax returns. The tax returns were filed in March 2014. He received a refund 
from his taxes. (Item 13, Response to FORM, Attachment B at 1 - 12)  
 
Applicant and his wife opened a franchise ice cream business in 2001. His wife 
had a complicated pregnancy and he was laid-off from his engineering position with an 
aviation company. Applicant was hired by his present employer in another state far 
removed from the state where the business was located. He could no longer operate 
the business from a different location and arranged for the sale of the business. In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant provided documents showing that on the sale of the 
business in 2003, the new franchisee assumed responsibility for the business debts. 
The responsibility for filing the state business tax form listed at SOR 1.b was transferred 
to the new franchisee. The new owner was also responsible for all business debts 
including any state taxes owed. (SOR 1.c) State tax documents show that the sale of 
the franchise resolves the business taxes for Applicant (Item 13, Response to FORM, 
Attachment A, at pages 1-4) 
 
Applicant was not aware of a credit card debt as noted at SOR 1.d. He has a 
credit card from the company, so he contacted the credit card company. He provided 
documents that he is current with his payments on the credit card. (Item 13, Response 
to the FORM, Attachment C, at 7 -8) 
 
Applicant was not aware of the medical debts at SOR 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g until he 
was informed of them by the OPM security investigator. He thought the bills had been 
paid by his health insurance. He contacted the medical creditors and resolved the three 
debts. The $451 medical debt at SOR 1.e was to a hospital and was paid and resolved 
in March 2016. (Item 13, Response to the FORM, Attachment C, at 1-2) The $223 debt 
at SOR 1.f was to a doctor and was paid and resolved in November 2015. (Item 13, 
Response to FORM, Attachment C, at 3 and 6) The $210 debt at SOR 1.g was for an 
anesthesiologist and was paid and resolved in November 2015. (Item 13, Response to 
FORM, Attachment C, at 4-5)  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
 
5 
 
 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debt 
and failure to file tax returns as required as shown by credit reports, answers to financial 
questions on the e-QIP, and responses to financial questions from the security 
investigator. The information raises security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 
19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of 
the same). The evidence indicates an inability and not an unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
 
 
6 
 
 
The mitigating conditions apply. The behavior causing the financial issues 
happened long ago, was infrequent, largely beyond Applicant’s control, and occurred 
under unusual circumstances that are not likely to recur. Applicant did not have all the 
documents required for him to file his federal and state taxes on time because he had 
moved. He gathered the required documents, hired a CPA, and filed his tax returns. He 
received a refund on his taxes when the returns were filed. Applicant also owed state 
business taxes from a business that he and his wife operated as a franchisee. When he 
could no longer manage the business because he had been transferred out of the state 
by his primary employer, the business was sold and the new buyer assumed 
responsibility for the business debts including the state business taxes. Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances by filing his tax returns and resolving the debt.  
 
Applicant established his good-faith initiative to pay his debts. For a good-faith 
effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a 
good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant provided sufficient 
documents to establish that there is no credit card debt due and that he paid the three 
medical debts. By paying his debts, Applicant showed a meaningful track record of debt 
payment, and that he acted with reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence 
to duty and obligation towards his finances. Applicant has met his burden to show that 
he is managing his personal financial obligations reasonably and responsibly, and his 
financial problems are behind him. There is ample evidence of responsible behavior, 
good judgment, and reliability. Based on all of the financial information, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
 
7 
 
 
due to circumstances largely beyond his control. He presented evidence that he paid or 
resolved the financial issues listed in the SOR. Applicant established that he acted 
reasonably and responsibly towards his finances, and that he will continue to 
responsibly manage his financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
