 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01438 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and H (Drug Involvement). Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his drug involvement, but he has not mitigated the concerns raised 
by his delinquent debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 24, 2012. 
On October 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and H. The DOD acted 
under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they 
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 23, 2015; and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on January 25, 2016. On February 1, 2016, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on February 5, 2016, but he did not respond. The 
case was assigned to me on July 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e-
1.i, and 2.a. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.j. His admissions are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old information security engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since August 2012. He was employed by another defense contractor from 
January 2004 to March 2006. He was employed by private-sector companies from 
February 2000 to December 2003 and from March 2006 to August 2012. He has never 
held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant served as an active reservist in the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve from 
June 1992 to June 1998 and as an inactive reservist from June 1998 to June 2000. He 
received honorable discharges for both periods of service. 
 
 Applicant attended a university from August 1994 to May 1997 and earned a 
bachelor’s degree. He married in August 2005. He has a daughter and a stepdaughter, 
ages 9 and 17. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in October 2012, he disclosed that he used 
marijuana “once every one or two years” in social situations from about August 1998 to 
May 2012. He stated that he does not intend to use any illegal drugs in the future 
because of the risk to his career. (Item 3 at 37-38.) His marijuana use is alleged in SOR 
¶ 2.a., which he admitted. 
 
 The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling about $105,000 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.j). 
The delinquent debts are reflected in his credit bureau reports (CBRs) from January 
2016, January 2015, and November 2012. (Items 5, 6, and 7.) 
 
 Applicant stated that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.j pertain to a 
mortgage loan that was resolved by a short sale, that the loans were forgiven, and that 
the debts were barred by a seven-year statute of limitations in November 2015. He 
stated that he was making monthly payments on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.l, which 
are the same debt, and that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was paid in full. He stated that he 
intended to contact the collection agencies for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.h. 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 3
(Item 2.) He provided no documentation of a short sale, forgiveness of any debts, 
payments on any debts, or payment agreements.  
 
Applicant’s claim that he is currently making payments on the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i is not supported by the evidence. His January 2016 CBR reflects 
that the last payment was in December 2015 and that the account was charged off for 
$10,473. (Item 5 at 2.) Applicant has not provided any evidence of additional payments, 
even though the FORM gave him that opportunity. 
 
Applicant’s January 2015 and January 2016 CBRs support Applicant’s claim that 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d has been paid. The CBRs reflect the debt as a paid 
charge-off. (Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 2.)  
 
Applicant asserted that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i were the same debt. His 
November 2012 CBR supports his claim, reflecting that the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i 
is the collection agent for the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Even though Department Counsel’s submission specifically commented on 
Applicant’s failure to provide documentation to support his responses to the SOR, he 
did not respond to the FORM. Except for his claims that SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i are 
duplicates and SOR ¶ 1.d has been paid, his responses to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e-1.j 
are not supported by documentary evidence. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 4
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 5
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a)-20(d) are not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous and 
recent. He provided no information regarding the circumstances in which his debts were 
incurred. He submitted no evidence of financial counseling. To the extent that Applicant 
relies on a statute of limitations to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.j, his 
reliance does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve a debt within the meaning of 
the Directive. (ISCR Case No. 07-06841 at 4. Bd. Dec. 19, 2008). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i. When the 
same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the 
duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-
04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I have 
resolved SOR ¶ 1.c in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 6
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant’s disclosure in his SCA and his admission of SOR ¶ 2.a establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG 
¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction”; and AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.” The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; 
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) is established. Applicant’s drug involvement ended in May 2012, 
more than four years ago, and there is no evidence that it has recurred. 
 
 AG 26(b) is not fully established. Although Applicant declared in his SCA that he 
intended to refrain from further drug involvement, he has not provided evidence that he 
has disassociated from his drug-using associates or that he avoids or has changed the 
environment where he used drugs. However, he has abstained from drug use for more 
than four years. His SCA is the equivalent of a signed statement of intent, but it does 
not include an agreement to automatic revocation of a clearance for any violation.   
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
 7
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and H in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 20(a). I have specifically considered 
Applicant’s honorable service in the U.S. Marine Corps, his history of employment by 
defense contractors, and his voluntary disclosure of his drug involvement. Because he 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I have no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003).  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
H, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug involvement, but he 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 8
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
