 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01618 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 25, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on January 13, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 21, 2016. He responded with a letter and documents 
that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. The case was assigned to me 
on March 15, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A through 
D are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since April 2014. He served in the National Guard from 1982 to 
1983 and on active duty in the U.S. military from 1983 until he retired with an honorable 
discharge in 2008. He married in 2002 and divorced in 2008. He married his second 
wife in 2008. He has an adult child and two adult stepchildren.1  
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling $14,681. However, credit reports 
show that Applicant is only an authorized user and not responsible for the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($4,788), 1.b ($3,863), 1.d ($728), and 1.e ($556). Additionally, the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($759) and 1.i ($760) are duplicates.2 Applicant denied owing the 
remaining debts, which total less than $4,000.3  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($157) and 1.g ($164) allege debts owed to the same 
telecommunications company. Applicant admitted he had an account with the company, 
but he stated the two accounts were duplicates and that the debt was paid in 2014. The 
May 2014 combined credit report lists two accounts as reported by Equifax, Experian, 
and TransUnion. The SOR ¶ 1.g debt has a date of last action of October 2012. That 
debt is not listed on the September 2015 Equifax credit report. That report lists the SOR 
¶ 1.f debt with a date of last payment of September 2014 and a balance of $157. 
Applicant submitted proof that he paid the company $157 in October 2014. He also 
submitted an October 2015 letter from the telecommunications company certifying that 
the account was paid.4 
 
Applicant denied owing the $2,906 account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h and the 
duplicate accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($759) and 1.i ($760). The debts are listed on 
both credit reports in evidence. Applicant has spent much of the last eight years working 
overseas while his wife remained at home. A few bills may have been overlooked during 
that time. He initially stated that he had no knowledge of the accounts. In his response 
to the FORM, he stated that he realized that he was responsible for the $759 debt 
                                                          
1 Item 2; AE A, D.  
 
2 The account numbers are the same. The bank identified in SOR ¶ 1.c formerly did business as the bank 
identified in SOR ¶ 1.i. See http://www.bbb.org/centralohio/business-reviews/credit-cards-and plans/ 
comenity-bank-in-columbus-oh-6558/.    
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
4 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
 
3 
 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and that he will pay the debt. Applicant stated that he is committed 
to paying his debts and that any delinquent accounts will be resolved.5 
 
Applicant was working overseas when he submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) in May 2014. There is no evidence that he submitted an SF 
86 in May 2013.6 He did not list any delinquent debts under the financial questions. 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he did not list any of 
the accounts on his SF 86 because he was unaware of them.7 I find that there is 
insufficient evidence for a determination that he intentionally provided false information 
on the SF 86. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
5 Items 1, 3, 4; AE A, B.  
 
6 The SOR alleged that Applicant intentionally falsified an SF 86 in May 2013. It did not allege falsification 
of the May 2014 SF 86 in evidence.  
7 Items 1, 2; AE A.  
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Two credit reports list that Applicant had delinquent debts. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant is only an authorized user and not responsible for the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($4,788), 1.b ($3,863), 1.d ($728), and 1.e ($556). Those allegations are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($759) and 1.i ($760) allege the same debt. When the same conduct 
is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations 
should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 21, 2005). SOR ¶ 1.i is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($157) and 1.g ($164) also appear to be duplicates. In any event, 
Applicant successfully disputed owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, and he 
 
5 
 
established through documentary evidence that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f was paid 
in October 2014, almost a year before the SOR was issued. SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
There are only two debts totaling $3,666 that are left unresolved. Applicant has 
spent much of the last eight years working overseas while his wife remained at home. In 
his response to the FORM, he stated that he realized that he was responsible for the 
$759 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and that he will pay the debt. Applicant may have 
overlooked the remaining debt while he was working overseas. He intends to pay his 
debts, which should include that debt. The two unresolved debts are insufficient to cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
6 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified an SF 86 in May 2013. 
There is no evidence that Applicant submitted an SF 86 in 2013. Additionally, there is 
insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally provided false 
information on the May 2014 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s 26 years of honorable military service and his years 
working overseas for defense contractors. Those factors outweigh any remaining 
financial issues, which are relatively minor.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
