 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04192 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 
In 2014 Applicant was discharged from military service for illegally using 
marijuana. He failed to disclose that information in his security clearance application. He 
did not mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for personal conduct. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 9, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) for 
re-investigation. On January 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On February 15, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR (Response), and 
requested a hearing. On April 4, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 18, 2016, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the hearing for May 11, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence without 
objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits. On May 23, 2016, DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Response, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR. His 
admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 32 years old and single. He has an eight-year-old son from a 
previous relationship. He has full custody of his child. He received a bachelor’s degree 
in 2015 and is a Ph.D. candidate. He has been a full-time student since 2015. He has 
worked part-time for a security company since 2006. That company is sponsoring his 
clearance. He also works part-time as a tutor at the college he attends. (Tr. 12-14, 17-
19; GE 1.) 
 
In October 2003 Applicant enlisted in the Army National Guard (Guard). He 
served two combat tours in the Middle East, one during 2005 and 2006, and one during 
2011 and 2012. (Tr. 15.) While serving he received a campaign medal, Army 
Commendation Medals, and Combat Action Badges. (Tr. 15-20.)  
 
In November 2013 Applicant got together with some friends. During the course of 
the evening he used marijuana with them. He said that was the first time he tried it. In 
December 2013 he took a random drug urinalysis for the Guard. In early 2014 his drill 
sergeant informed him that he tested positive for marijuana. In May 2014 he was 
discharged from the Guard with a general discharge for testing positive for marijuana. 
(GE 2.) He was a staff sergeant (E-6) at the time of his discharge. (Tr. 16.) He held a 
security clearance from the time he enlisted in 2003 until he was discharged in 2014. He 
was aware that the Guard had a policy that does not tolerate illegal drug use. (Tr. 21.)  
 
Applicant has not used marijuana since the above incident in November 2013. 
(Tr. 35.) He no longer associates with those friends. (Tr. 39.)  
 
When Applicant completed the 2014 SF 86, he did not disclose that he illegally 
used marijuana in November 2013. During an investigative interview in September 
2014, he discussed his illegal use, and was not forthcoming about his non-disclosure of 
the information. (GE 2.) While testifying, he admitted that he intentionally did not 
disclose the incident because he did not want to lose his National Guard employment 
and job. (Tr. 42.) 
 
Applicant’s employer and supervisor learned of his marijuana use in January 
2014 (Tr. 29.) Applicant did not tell his supervisor about this hearing or that he failed to 
disclose the information in his SF 86. (Tr. 36. 45.)  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant acknowledged that he made serious mistakes by using marijuana, and 
by subsequently failing to disclose it or to fully inform his supervisor about his conduct. 
He said he was embarrassed about his conduct and took full responsibility for his 
actions. He intends to tell his supervisor about his non-disclosure. (Tr. 45.) He fully 
appreciates the importance of honesty and exhibited visible remorse over his wrongful 
conduct.   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
 In May 2014 Applicant was discharged from the Guard after he tested positive for 
illegal use of marijuana, which conduct he knew was in violation of the Guard’s drug 
policy. The evidence establishes a security concern under AG ¶ 16(f). He intentionally 
failed to disclose said conduct in his 2014 SF 86, which raises a security concern under 
AG ¶ 16(a). His illegal use of marijuana and subsequent concealment of information 
about it created a vulnerability to duress, because it is the type of conduct which, if 
known, may affect his personal or professional standing. His subsequent attempts to 
conceal this activity from the Government and his employer confirm that he perceived 
this vulnerability. The evidence supports the application of AG ¶ 16(e)(1).    
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 17 includes five conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant did not make a prompt or good-faith effort to correct the 
misrepresentation he made in his 2014 SF 86, prior to or during an investigative 
interview. AG ¶ 17(a) does not provide mitigation. Failing to intentionally disclose 
information in a security clearance application is not a minor offense. AG ¶ 17(c) does 
not provide mitigation for the SOR allegations. Applicant ultimately acknowledged his 
misconduct, demonstrating a willingness to take responsibility for his behavior, and 
providing some mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d). Because he has not told his supervisor that 
he failed to truthfully disclose his illegal marijuana use in his SF 86, AG ¶ 17(e) does not 
provide mitigation. He said he has not used marijuana since November 2013 and no 
longer associates with the people with whom he used it.  AG ¶ 17(g) provides some 
mitigation.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old man who successfully served this country for 10 years, 
including two combat tours. He is intelligent, educated, and a single father. In November 
2013 he made a serious mistake when he chose to use marijuana with friends. That 
mistake resulted in his discharge from the Guard. Subsequently, he decided not to 
disclose the information in his SF 86. After listening to him testify and observing his 
demeanor, I find him credibly remorseful and readily accountable for his misconduct. He 
is maturing and learning the importance of forthrightness, regardless of his fear of 
consequences or embarrassment over his behaviors. However, at this time he has not 
provided sufficient evidence of rehabilitation to reinstate his security clearance. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with concerns as to Applicant’s present eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
________________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
