 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 15-00758  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant deliberately falsified his 
April 2014 security clearance application. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or 
deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant, through counsel, timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On April 4, 2016, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and 
submission of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  
The parties complied and submitted documents by the April 15, 2016 deadline. At the 
hearing, which proceeded as scheduled on April 26, 2015, Applicant represented 
himself.3 I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Hearing Exhibits I – III, 
without objection. Applicant did not present any documents. The record remained open 
until May 13, 2016, to allow the parties to present additional information. Department 
Counsel timely submitted GE 4 and 5, which are admitted without objection. Applicant 
did not submit any documentation. The Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) 
received the transcript (Tr.) on May 6, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, has worked as a mechanical engineer for a federal contractor 
since 2007. He was first granted access to classified information in 2008. The next year, 
Applicant completed another security clearance application and was favorably 
adjudicated for a higher level of access. He completed his most recent application in 
April 2014 as required for a periodic reinvestigation.4 
 
In accordance with his employer’s policy, Applicant submitted a draft of his 2014 
security clearance application to his employer’s security department for review. Security 
specialists review each application before it is submitted to identify and counsel 
employees about potential issues. On his draft application, Applicant disclosed that he 
took trips to his native Hong Kong in 2007, 2008, and 2012 to visit family and friends. 
The purpose of the 2007 trip was to visit his terminally ill grandmother; the purpose of 
the 2008 visit was to attend a relative’s wedding; and, the purpose of the 2012 trip was 
to visit with family and friends and join a tour group to Taiwan. Applicant also disclosed 
three other international trips. Based on these disclosures, the security specialist 
advised Applicant that he needed to disclose the names of the relatives he saw on his 
trips to Hong Kong before he submitted his final application. Applicant did not ask for 
clarification about the scope of disclosure. The security specialist also explained that 
international trips strictly for tourism purposes do not require disclosure of foreign 
national contacts.5 
 
Instead of following the security specialist’s advice, Applicant decided to 
reclassify his trips to Hong Kong as tourism trips. He reasoned that the label was 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 Initially represented by counsel, Applicant’s attorney withdrew from the case on April 7, 2016. 
 
4 Tr. 23-24; GE 1,3. 
 
5 Tr. 30-31, 35-37.  
 
 
3 
 
appropriate because he engaged in some sightseeing on each trip. He also reasoned 
that the reclassification eliminated the need for him to provide details about the foreign 
nationals he came into contact with during these visits. Applicant submitted his final 
security clearance application to the security officer on April 24, 2016.6  The next day, 
security office filed an incident report in JPAS indicating: 
 
Employee failed to report relatives he visited in Hong Kong in December 
2008 and April 2012, on his SF-86 after specifically being instructed to list 
the information in Section 19. Instead, in Section 20C, he changed the 
purpose of the travel from “Visit family or friend” to “Tourism” on both 
entries.7  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a background investigator in August 2014. During 
the interview, Applicant revealed contact with 16 foreign nationals who are citizens of 
Hong Kong. He told the interviewer that he did not disclose them because he did not 
consider the contacts to be either close or ongoing, even though Applicant maintained 
regular contact with each individual he disclosed.  Applicant also admitted providing 
support to a foreign national, his uncle. At the time of the interview, Applicant admitted 
to having sent his uncle $2,000 to $3,000. This support is separate from the $500 in 
monthly support Applicant’s mother provides to her brother, which Applicant facilitates 
by purchasing and sending money orders on her behalf. The investigator confronted 
Applicant about the facts in the incident report filed by his employer. Applicant admitted 
that he disregarded the security specialist’s instructions regarding the disclosure of his 
foreign national contacts. After the interview, Applicant’s employer filed a second 
incident report in JPAS, citing previously undisclosed contacts with the foreign nationals 
Applicant discussed during his interview.8 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified his security clearance 
application by deliberately failing to disclose: his foreign national contacts in Section 19: 
Foreign Contacts; that he provided financial support to a foreign national in Section 20A: 
Foreign Activities; and, that he deliberately miscategorized the nature of his trips to 
Hong Kong in Section 20C: Foreign Travel. Applicant denies the allegations, claiming 
that he made a mistake. He offered three explanations. First, Applicant blamed having 
to submit the application on a tight deadline. Second, Applicant claims that he was 
trying to keep his disclosures consistent with his 2007 and 2008 security clearance 
applications where he disclosed the purpose of his Hong Kong trips as being for 
pleasure. Third, Applicant explained that he misunderstood the phrase “foreign national” 
as it was being used during his adjudication. He believed the term referred to foreign 
individuals who are affiliated with foreign governments, which caused him to provide 
incorrect answers to the questions at issue. Applicant explained that had he understood 
                                                          
6 Tr. 37-40, 46-50; GE 1-2.  
 
7 GE 3. 
 
8 GE 2-3.  
 
 
4 
 
the term “foreign national” as used in this context, he would have made the appropriate 
disclosures.9  
 
In the future, Applicant, who immigrated to the United States at 14 years old and 
completed his education in the United States, including earning a graduate degree from 
one of the most prestigious institutes of technology in the country, will make it “a 
personal goal to seek guidance whenever I come across an English term that I am 
unfamiliar with to ensure no future misunderstandings.” On the version of the security 
clearance application Applicant completed in 2014, the term “foreign national” is defined 
before Section 19 as, “any person who is not a citizen or national of the United 
States.”10 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 25-30, 34; Answer. 
 
10 GE 1; Answer.  
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a security concern when he acts in a 
way that raises questions about his judgment or his ability to protect classified 
information.11 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his answers to the questions in 
Sections 19, 20A, and 20C, about his relationships with foreign nationals and foreign 
travel on his 2014 security clearance application.  The record supports a finding that 
Applicant’s actions were deliberate.12  
 
Applicant’s claim that he tried to keep his disclosures about his travel to Hong 
Kong consistent with his earlier applications does not explain the falsification. The 2014 
version of the application is different from the 2008 application, offering more options to 
describe the purpose of international travel. The revised form gives applicants the 
choice of distinguishing international travel as being to “visit family and friends” or 
“tourism” as opposed to the general description of pleasure travel on the 2008 
application. Also, Applicant’s claims that the omissions on his 2014 security clearance 
application were a mistake are not supported by the record.  Applicant admitted that he 
chose to disregard instructions from his security specialist about proper disclosure of his 
foreign national contacts and classification of the nature of his foreign travel.  
 
Applicant’s explanation for his failure to properly answer question 20A about 
providing support to foreign nationals – that he did not understand the term “foreign 
national,” is not credible. The term is clearly and plainly defined in the application, 
making the definition concocted by Applicant implausible. Furthermore, Applicant’s 
excuse that his limited facility with English contributed to his misunderstanding is 
disingenuous. When Applicant completed his 2014 security clearance, he was 39 years 
old and had been living in the United States continuously for 25 years. He completed 
high school, college, and graduate school at U.S. universities and had been working in 
his field and as a lecturer at local colleges since 1999. Also, after having the opportunity 
to observe and interact with Applicant at the hearing, it is clear he demonstrates a 
comfort with English commensurate with an individual of his education and professional 
levels.  
 
None of the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply.  Applicant’s omissions 
on his 2014 security clearance application are neither minor nor immaterial. He created 
the impression that he did not have continuing ties to his native Hong Kong. It does not 
matter if his motive was to hide his contacts or to avoid the task of gathering the 
necessary information required for the form, the result is the same. Applicant chose not 
to disclose the required information. Applicant’s falsifications are not mitigated by the 
fact that he made the disclosures during his background interview. Applicant does not 
have the purview to decide how and when he will parse out information to the 
government.  An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, and candid answers at 
every step of the adjudication process. His failure to do is a legitimate reason for 
denying his access to classified information.   
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 15. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b). 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this 
conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Security 
clearance decisions are not an exact science, but rather are predictive judgments about 
a person's security suitability in light of that person's past conduct and present 
circumstances.13 Applicant’s falsifications raise concerns about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. These concerns are compounded by Applicant’s testimony and 
demeanor at hearing. Applicant did not seem to understand the seriousness of his 
deliberate withholding of information during his security clearance investigation and 
adjudication. The Government must be able to rely on a clearance holder’s ability to 
self-report potentially negative information without regard for the inconvenience or the 
consequences of the disclosure. Applicant has proven unable to do so. Accordingly, he 
has not shown himself suitable for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-29 (1988). 
 
