 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02078 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 23, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 22, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on July 5, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1986. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has 
held since about 1987. He has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 1985 and a 
master’s degree that was awarded in 1993. He is married with four children between the 
ages of 16 and 21.1 
 
Applicant and his wife struggled financially when she was a stay-at-home mother 
to their four young children, and they had unexpected medical expenses. They filed a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in 2001. They completed their plan and any remaining 
dischargeable debts were discharged in 2006.2 
 
Applicant’s finances stabilized after the bankruptcy. His wife was self-employed 
for a period in an industry in which her annual income was about $82,000. With a bad 
economy and much of the industry moving overseas, Applicant’s wife was unable to 
remain profitable and she left the industry in about 2008. She was unemployed and 
underemployed for an extended period. Applicant had major surgery in 2013, which 
caused him to be out of work for several months and resulted in about $4,000 in 
unreimbursed medical expenses. His wife went back to school in 2013 to become a 
licensed realtor. She recently started having some success, but they were already 
behind on their mortgage loan and other debts became delinquent.3 
 
The SOR alleges the mortgage loan that was $85,100 past due and in 
foreclosure and 15 delinquent debts totaling about $39,200. Applicant admitted owing 
all the debts except for the $28 debt to a satellite television provider alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.p. That debt is listed by Equifax and Experian on the March 2014 combined credit 
report, with an activity date of February 2012. It is not listed on the February 2015 
Equifax credit report.4  
 
Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in November 2015. 
Under Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured Claims, the petition listed a $338,669 
mortgage loan with a $90,000 arrearage and $14,195 owed on an auto loan. The 
petition listed $3,500 owed to Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney under Schedule E, 
Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16, 31, 35; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-22, 37-38; GE 2; AE C, D. 
 
3 Tr. at 17-20, 23-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 9; AE C. 
 
4 Tr. at 33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed debts totaling $29,402, which included 
$2,406 owed to the IRS for tax year 2011.5  
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy plan was approved in February 2016. The plan calls for 
60 monthly payments, with payments of $2,030 for 12 months, followed by $2,092 
payments for 48 months. The total to be paid through the plan is $124,776. The 
bankruptcy payments are being garnished from Applicant’s paycheck. He submitted 
documentation that he has made all required payments since the plan went into effect in 
March 2016. As of June 24, 2016, he had paid a total of $7,026 into the plan.6 
 
Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy. He 
also completed additional courses. His finances are in better shape. His annual salary is 
about $142,000. His wife sold two houses that were due to close shortly after the 
hearing. He and his wife have cut down on the non-essentials. Applicant and his wife 
both credibly testified that they will make all the required payments under the plan until 
the bankruptcy is discharged.7 
 
Applicant submitted numerous documents and letters attesting to his excellent 
job performance. He is praised for his moral character, honesty, work ethic, 
professionalism, trustworthiness, loyalty, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 18; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE D. 
 
6 Tr. at 32; GE 1, 6; AE A, D. 
 
7 Tr. at 18-20, 25-26, 29, 32-35, 39, 47-48; AE C. 
 
8 AE B, C, E. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s recent financial problems were primarily the result of his wife’s 
unemployment and underemployment. He also had major surgery in 2013, which 
resulted in him being out of work for several months and about $4,000 in unreimbursed 
medical expenses.  
 
 Applicant successfully completed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan in 2006. He is 
once again resolving his debts through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. He has 
consistently paid $2,030 per month into the plan since the plan went into effect in March 
2016. As of June 24, 2016, he had paid a total of $7,026 into the plan. His current 
finances are stable. He and his wife both credibly testified that they will continue with 
the bankruptcy plan until completion.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not completely applicable because the bankruptcy 
has only been in effect since March 2016. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are applicable. AG ¶ 
20(e) is applicable to the successfully disputed debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence, the nature of his financial 
problems, and the steps he has taken to resolve them. He has a plan to resolve his 
financial problems, and he has taken significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
