 Exhibit 1 (commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-00392
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for
access to classified information. The evidence is sufficient to explain and mitigate
Applicant’s financial problems and difficulties. Accordingly, this case is decided for
Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on August 22, 2014.  About one year later on September 27,1
2015, after reviewing the application and information gathered during a background
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
 Exhibit 1. 4
2
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a statement of reasons2
(SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to3
a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. She answered the SOR on October
28, 2015, and requested a hearing.          
The case was assigned to me on February 22, 2016. The hearing was held as
scheduled on May 24, 2016. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1–4, and they were
admitted. Applicant testified on her own behalf and offered Exhibits A–D, and they were
admitted. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on June 2, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security clearance
for the first time. She is employed as a civil engineer and project manager working on
construction and design projects on a military installation. She has worked for her
current employer since June 2014. Before that, she worked as a civil engineer for
another company on the same military installation during 2013–2014. Before that, she
worked as a project manger for another company on the same military installation
during 2006–2013. And before that, she worked as a project engineer for another
company during 1999–2006. Her education includes a master’s degree in civil
engineering.  
Applicant’s first marriage was brief (1989–1990) and ended in divorce. She
married again in 1998. She and her husband have three children, ages 13, 14, and 17,
in their household. She also has a 23-year-old married stepdaughter. She described her
husband as dyslexic, unable to read, and not good with paperwork, and he is a self-
employed handyman.  
In her August 2014 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that she
had failed to file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, and
2013.  She stated that she was working on getting the returns filed, she did not owe any4
back taxes, and she expected to receive refunds. 
 Exhibit 3.5
 Exhibit 2. 6
 Exhibit C.7
 Exhibit 4. 8
3
A September 2014 credit report was obtained during Applicant’s background
investigation.  It lists six medical collection accounts, most for small or minor amounts,5
for a total of $1,093. Otherwise, the credit report contains no delinquent, collection,
charged-off, or past-due accounts, and no tax liens. 
Applicant provided additional details about her financial record during her
background interview in October 2014.  She confirmed that she had yet to file her state6
and federal tax returns for 2011, 2012, and 2013, but hoped to do so by the end of the
month. She explained her failure to file the returns was due to the crash of her personal
computer in which she used a financial software program to track and store her financial
information. She also reported that she had been past due on medical bills, and she
attributed the problem to changes in employment during 2013–2014 and several
changes of health insurers.   7
An additional credit report was obtained in August 2015, shortly before the SOR
was issued.  It lists six medical collection accounts for a total of $979. Four of the six8
accounts are also listed on the previous credit report. Otherwise, the credit report
contains no delinquent, collection, charged-off, or past-due accounts, and no tax liens.
Under Guideline F, the SOR allegations fall into two groups: (1) Applicant failed
to file state and federal income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, and 2013; and (2) 
based on the two credit reports, eight unpaid medical collection accounts for a total of
$1,414. The SOR allegations are established by Department Counsel’s documentary
evidence, Applicant’s documentary evidence, and Applicant’s admissions in her answer
to the SOR and her hearing testimony. 
At the hearing, Applicant explained the failure to file the tax returns was due to a
combination of circumstances:
I was working with a man who was helping me with taxes. He wasn’t - - he
just helped, but I still signed them - - he wasn’t a CPA or anything; he
didn’t submit them for me.
And I asked him if there was a reason to rush if the government owed me,
and he said no, like there’s no penalty if the government owes you. So I
just didn’t - - I just saved up my paperwork.
In 2011 we moved [to a house about one mile away], and I was busy
remodeling our house, and then after that, when we unpacked everything,
 Tr. 29–30. 9
 Tr. 52–54. 10
 Tr. 54, 44. 11
 Tr. 45, 58–59. 12
 Exhibits A and B. 13
 Tr. 42–43.14
 Exhibits A and B; Tr. 45. 15
 Tr. 45--46, 51–52. 16
4
finally I got all my paperwork. By then it was 2012. Then my computer
crashed; I lost everything. I keep everything in Quicken.
And so I had to get a new computer, and then I had to recover the hard
drive from the crashed computer to get my Quicken file. So I finally got
that [done], and then at that point I was like, well, since the government
owes me, I’ll work it when I can. So that’s kind of what happened there.  9
She did not understand that the obligation to file a tax return was independent from
whether she was due a refund.  She also conceded that procrastination was a factor,10
and she got behind and was overwhelmed by the situation.  Because of his dyslexia,11
her husband is of no assistance with the tax matters, and he has difficultly with the
limited paperwork for his handyman business.   12
Applicant filed state and federal income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, and
2013, in January and February 2015, which is several months before the SOR was
issued to her.  She acknowledged she was prompted to do so by information she13
received during the October 2014 background investigation.  The IRS tax return14
transcripts for those three years show that she and her husband, with a filing status of
married filing joint, received refunds for each year in the total amount of $10,670. The
state income tax returns for those three years show refunds of $423 and $418 for two
years and tax due of $172 for one year. In addition, she timely filed state and federal
income tax returns for tax years 2014 and 2015 within an extension of time.  They15
received $7,408 in refunds from the IRS for those two years and $768 in refunds from
the state for the last two tax years. 
For tax year 2015, Applicant retained the services of a certified public accountant
(CPA), and she intends to use those services going forward.  She believes using the16
CPA will be helpful in (1) timely filing tax returns, (2) dealing with her husband’s self-
employment income, and (3) dealing with income from two rental properties they bought
 Tr. 54. 17
 Exhibit 4. 18
 Tr. 35; Exhibit C. 19
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to20
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.21
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 22
5
in 2015, which are managed by her husband. She also believes using the CPA will help
with her tendency to procrastinate.    17
Concerning the medical collection accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c–1.h, she explained in
her answer to the SOR that the creditor is representing the same healthcare service,
and she paid the accounts in October 2015. She denied the validity of the accounts in
SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j for $215 and $220, because they did not appear on a recent credit
report. Likewise, those two accounts do not appear on the Government’s most recent
credit report from August 2015.  18
At the hearing, Applicant’s documentation included proof of payment for five
medical collection accounts to the same healthcare service for a total of $1,161. Four of
the accounts were paid in October 2015, and one account was paid in May 2016. She
explained that the medical collection accounts came about because the healthcare
service did not file a claim with her insurance or they filed with the wrong insurance, and
it was difficult to keep up with the medical billing.19
Applicant was polite and respectful throughout the hearing. She answered
questions in an open and honest way. Overall, I found her statements credible and
worthy of belief. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As20
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt21
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An22
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 23
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.26
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 28
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).29
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.30
6
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  23
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting24
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An25
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate26
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  27
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s28
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.29
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it30
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 31
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant32
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  33
 AG ¶¶ 19(c) and (g).34
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).35
7
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant31
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 32
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  33
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a history of financial
problems and difficulties. Her failure to file state and federal income tax returns for
2011, 2012, and 2013, and multiple medical collection accounts are sufficient to raise a
concern.  The tax matters deserve close examination because failure to timely file tax34
returns or pay taxes suggests that an applicant has a problem complying with well-
established governmental rules and systems. And voluntary compliance with such rules
and systems is essential for protecting classified information. With that said, I have
given less weight to the medical collection accounts. They are for relatively small if not
minor amounts of money. Moreover, medical debt is presumed to be incurred for
necessary medical care and treatment as opposed to frivolous or irresponsible
spending.  
I considered the six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and the following35
are most pertinent in analyzing Applicant’s case:
8
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control; and 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
The latter mitigating condition applies to Applicant’s payment of the medical
collection accounts. The former mitigating condition applies to her efforts to comply with
tax laws by filing the state and federal income tax returns for the three years in question.
In addition, she timely filed returns for the last two tax years. And for the most recent tax
year (2015), she retained the services of a CPA to assist her with the returns for that
year and in future tax years. Taken together, these circumstances show that her tax
problems are resolved and are under control going forward. 
In addition to the formal mitigating circumstances, I considered several other
circumstances as follows:
I considered the nature, extent, and seriousness of Applicant’s financial
problems. The tax matters are serious while the medical collection accounts are of
minor concern. The seriousness of the tax matters is lessened to some extent by the
absence of tax liens and other collection actions.  
I considered her reliance on the erroneous advice she received from a former tax
preparer that she did not need to timely file a return if a refund was due. She now
understands that advice was mistaken.  
I considered the frequency of the conduct (three tax years) and the recency of
the conduct (the untimely returns were filed in January and February 2015, several
months before the SOR was issued). 
I considered her age and maturity at the time. I note that she is a mother with
three school-age children, a full-time job, and a spouse who is unable to assist her with
managing financial and tax obligations. 
I considered the presence of rehabilitation (she is now in compliance with state
and federal tax authorities) and other behavioral changes (she is now using a CPA for
the tax matters). 
I considered her motivation in failing to timely file the tax returns. It was not an
attempt to evade or avoid paying taxes. Indeed, she received large refunds upon filing
the returns. 
I considered the likelihood of recurrence. I assess the likelihood as acceptably
low based on her decision to use a CPA for her tax matters. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).36
9
I gave her favorable consideration for her full, frank, and candid disclosure of the
unfiled tax returns on her security clearance application. She was also truthful and
complete in responding to questions during the security-clearance process. Her actions
are exactly what is expected of a person who is seeking access to classified
information. 
And I gave her favorable consideration for seeking professional assistance and
using the services of a CPA for her tax matters. 
These circumstances, combined with the mitigating conditions discussed above,
persuade me that Applicant’s financial problems are in the past and are unlikely to
recur. She presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the security
concern. 
Applicant’s financial problems and difficulties do not create doubt about her
current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I36
conclude that she met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
