 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01992 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 10, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On March 14, 2016, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and it was received on March 24, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the Government’s evidence. The Government’s documents identified as Items 
2 through 7 are admitted into evidence. Applicant provided documents that are marked 
as Items 8 through 10 and are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on May 25, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He graduated from a service academy in 1994. He 
served on active duty until 2000 when he was honorably discharged. He earned a 
master’s degree in 1998 and another in 2006. He married in 1997 and divorced in 2007. 
He remarried in 2007 and has two children ages six and three.  
 
 Applicant purchased a condominium in 2001. After his 2007 divorce he wanted to 
sell the condominium so he could remove his ex-wife’s name from the title and use the 
proceeds to pay his alimony settlement in full. In addition, he had purchased another 
home at the time. Due to the struggling real estate market in 2007, his condo was 
valued at less than the mortgage. He had always paid his mortgage timely. He was 
advised by his realtor to cease making mortgage payments to force the lender to short 
sale the house. The mortgage lender refused to short sale the house and it foreclosed 
in December 2010.  
 
 Applicant disclosed during his August 2013 interview with a government 
investigator and in his response to the FORM that his mortgage company and 
successor mortgage companies for the condominium were sued by the state in four 
class action lawsuits due to their handling of real estate transactions and dishonest loan 
modification processes. Applicant eventually received small cash settlements as part of 
class action lawsuits.  
 
 The mortgage debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a has been resolved. A March 2016 credit 
report lists the debt as “creditor grantor reclaimed collateral to settle defaulted 
mortgage.” There is no deficiency amount supported by evidence.1  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was for delinquent homeowner association fees 
associated with the foreclosed condo. Applicant was advised by his realtor when he was 
attempting to short sale the property to stop paying the fees as they would be included 
in the short sale. He complied with the advice. The debt was sold to a collection agency 
and not included with the foreclosure. The creditor obtained a judgment against 
Applicant, which he disclosed on his security clearance application. He paid the 
judgment through a court-ordered garnishment and completed payment in 2013. The 
                                                          
1 Items 7, 8, 9, 10. 
 
3 
 
 
debt is listed on his August 2013 credit report. It is no longer on his September 2014 or 
March 2016 credit reports. It is resolved.2  
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b for an unpaid utility bill associated with 
the foreclosed property, indicating it was settled in 2012-2013. It was reported on his 
August 2013 credit report. It is not listed on his September 2014 or March 2016 credit 
reports. It is resolved.3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
2 Item 5, 6. 
 
3 Items 7, 8, 9, 10. 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.4 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
Applicant had a past-due mortgage debt and two debts associated with that 
property that were delinquent. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s condominium was foreclosed after he was unable to sell it. It was 
later learned through class action lawsuits that the lender’s conduct raised questionable 
practices. The mortgage debt was resolved through the foreclosure. The other debts 
associated with the property were also resolved. Applicant has no other financial issues 
or delinquent debts. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that the financial issues 
happened under unique circumstances and are unlikely to recur. His behavior does not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
applies 
 
Applicant financial issues were partially within his control, in that he did not have 
to sell the property necessarily at that time, but chose to do so because he had already 
purchased another house and he wanted to pay his alimony in full. However, his 
inability to complete the financial transaction due to the downturn in the real estate 
market and the conduct of the lender were circumstances beyond his control. I find 
Applicant acted responsibly under those circumstances and AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are resolved and there is no evidence that 
Applicant has other financial problems. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
