 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-01017 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2011 and continue to the present. She 
failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. 
Based upon a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 17, 2014, Applicant submitted a public trust position application (SF 
85P). On August 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 27, 2015 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Department of Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on November 17, 2015, and 
issued a Notice of Hearing on April 18, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
May 11, 2016. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
evidence. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through I into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 23, 2016. The record remained open until June 
3, 2016, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents. She timely 
submitted seven exhibits that I marked as AE J through P and admitted without 
objection. I marked her transmittal email as AE Q and admitted it into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted 56 of the 57 allegations contained in the SOR. 
She denied the allegation in ¶ 1.a. Her admissions are incorporated into these findings. 
   
Applicant is 23 years old and unmarried. She has earned about 17 college 
credits. She began working for her current employer, a defense contractor, in March 
2014. Prior to this position she had worked for an insurance company for about a year 
and a half. She was then unemployed for six months before obtaining her current job. 
Her employer is aware of this hearing and the financial delinquencies underlying the 
trustworthiness concerns. (Tr. 14-18, 22.) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties began when she was about 20 years old. Since 
then she has had various medical conditions and emergencies, which have required 
numerous visits to an emergency room and physicians for which she did not have 
medical insurance. In January 2015 she obtained medical insurance through her 
employer. (Tr. 19-21.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from July 2015 and August 2014, the SOR 
alleged 57 delinquent debts totaling $39,122, and accumulating between 2011 and 
2014. All are medical debts, except the debt for $3,508 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. That 
automobile loan debt is being resolved through an automobile loan on which she makes 
monthly payments of $300. (Tr. 27; GE 3, GE 4.) The $12,587 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.rr is a judgment owed to a medical clinic. She is trying to arrange a payment plan. (Tr. 
38, 43.) The remaining 55 medical debts are unaddressed and unresolved, including 
several small debts for $13, $20, $29, $35, and $31. 
 
In addition to the SOR debts, Applicant owes additional medical debts which 
became delinquent in mid-2015, after she had obtained medical insurance.1 They are 
listed on a May 2016 CBR, some of which are small amounts, such as $40 and $26, 
and probably co-pays. (AE A.) Her student loans total about $10,000 and are deferred. 
(Tr. 23, 37; AE L, AE O.) She believes that all of her debts, including the $39,000 owed 
for the SOR allegations, total between $50,000 and $60,000. (Tr. 41-42.) She testified 
that she intends to pay her debts when she is financially able. (Tr. 30.) 
 
In May 2016 Applicant met with a credit counseling service. Her annual salary for 
2015 was $22,500. Her current net monthly income is $1,400 and expenses are $1,815, 
                                            
1 Although these additional debts are not alleged in the SOR, they may be considered in an analysis of 
mitigating conditions and the whole-person concept. They will not be included in the analysis of 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
leaving a deficit of $415. (AE H, AE P.) In her post-hearing submission, she indicated 
that after speaking to a credit counselor and evaluating her financial situation, she has 
decided to file bankruptcy. She re-contacted the bankruptcy attorney, with whom she 
had previously spoken about filing bankruptcy in 2015 but then chose not to go forward. 
(Tr. 30; AE F, AE K, AE Q.)  
 
Applicant’s mother testified. She explained the difficulties her daughter 
experienced while trying to obtain health insurance. She thinks Applicant has become 
more responsible and mature since starting her current position. (Tr. 46-48.) Applicant 
submitted her 2015 performance evaluation. Her supervisor gave her a high rating of 
meeting the employer’s expectations. (AE M.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts in 2011, which she has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy to date. The evidence raises both of the above 
trustworthiness concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Because Applicant’s debts are ongoing, the evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Of the 57 alleged debts, 56 of them are medical debts, 
which arose because Applicant did not have medical insurance for several years. Those 
were circumstances beyond her control. However, she did not produce evidence to 
demonstrate that she attempted to responsibly manage the debts while they were 
accumulating, including some of the smaller debts, which proof is necessary to establish 
full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant did not participate in credit or financial 
counseling until after her hearing. At this time there is no evidence that her financial 
problems are under control. Thus, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. She provided some 
evidence that she recently negotiated a payment plan for an automobile loan and has it 
included in her budget, indicating a good-faith effort to resolve the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.a. She established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as to that debt. Applicant did not 
formally dispute any of the alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an honest and 
intelligent 23-year-old woman, who has successfully worked for a defense contractor for 
two years. Since 2011 she accumulated numerous delinquent medical debts because 
she did not have insurance to cover the medical services or the income to pay them. 
The SOR alleged at least $36,000 of unpaid medical debts, and her recent CBR 
includes more medical debts, which accumulated after January 2015 when she had 
medical insurance. To date all of those debts are unresolved, including small debts for 
$13 to $35, which may be co-pays. After her hearing in early May 2016, she met with a 
credit counselor to review her situation and design a budget. As a consequence she 
decided to file a bankruptcy. Although she is becoming more maturely involved in her 
financial obligations and decisions, she has not yet established a reliable track record of 
managing her finances and medical bills. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all facts and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, the 
record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
position of trust at this time. For these reasons, I conclude that Applicant did not 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.eee:  Against Applicant 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
