1
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                      
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-05503
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant admitted sharing marijuana provided by friends about four or five times
per year between July 2008 and July 2014. He stopped drug use when he obtained his
master’s degree and decided to apply for his current position. Resulting security
concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 10, 2014. On
February 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
Applicant confirmed that he and Department Counsel discussed and agreed to this hearing date, and that1
he was ready to proceed without needing any additional time to prepare.  He waived the 15-day notice that
the Directive provides,  and I granted him 28 days of additional time to submit evidence due to the pending
holidays. (Tr. 11-12, AE A.)
2
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information,
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on March 8, 2016, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on May 2, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on May 11, 2016. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 13, 2016,
setting the hearing date for June 1, 2016.  I convened the hearing as scheduled. The1
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant submitted Exhibit (AE) A, which was also admitted without objection. Applicant
provided testimony from two witnesses, and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 8, 2016. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked as an industrial hygienist since November 2014. He earned a bachelor’s degree
in 2005, and a master’s degree in exposure science in June 2014. He has never held a
security clearance and has no military service. He is married, and has one child born in
February 2016. (GE 1; Tr. 7, 53.) 
Applicant admitted, on his security clearance application, in his response to the
SOR, and during his testimony, that he used marijuana approximately four to five times
a year from July 2008 to July 2014. He candidly admitted this drug use, and his
admissions are the only source of record information concerning these events. He used
a small amount of marijuana that was provided by, and shared with, friends of his during
social events. Often, but not exclusively, this took place while he was traveling to
perform with a band of which he was a member during that period. He never purchased
marijuana, used it by himself, or possessed it other than holding the marijuana that was
being passed around on those occasions. (GE 1; GE 2; AR; Tr. 48-50.) 
After finishing his master’s degree and being recommended by one of his
professors for employment in his current position, Applicant voluntarily stopped using
marijuana and has abstained from any such use since July 2014. He knew that
marijuana use, although legal under his local state’s laws, was not permitted by his
employer or while performing contract services on Federal installations. He had no
desire to disqualify himself from such work over something that was unimportant to him.
As he testified, “it was really never something that I was all that interested in or enjoyed
3
that much, you know. Never enough to, like, do it on my own or, you know, buy it or
anything. So it wasn’t a difficult thing to give up.” (Tr. 50-51.) 
Applicant credibly testified that he intends to continue to abstain from any drug
abuse and fully recognizes that such conduct is incompatible with holding a security
clearance, and with working for his current employer or on a Federal installation. He
signed a written statement of intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, with immediate
revocation of his security clearance for any violation. (Tr. 13, 23-24; AE A.)
Applicant’s immediate supervisor and her supervisor, who is a vice president of
their company and Applicant’s overall program manager, each took significant time off
work to attend his hearing. They both have significant contact with Applicant on a
regular basis, and testified about his dedication, trustworthiness, responsibility, hard
work, integrity, and overall good character. Both of them have many years working in
positions requiring security clearances and performing important work under defense
contracts. Their testimony, in support of Applicant’s overall fitness for holding a security
clearance and complying with applicable security procedures, was credible and
uncontroverted. (Tr. 26-44.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
4
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DC raised by the evidence in this case is: 
(a) any drug abuse. 
Applicant admittedly used marijuana that was passed around a group of his
friends on 25 to 30 occasions from 2008 until July 2014, when he decided to seek a
position in which illegal drug use was not permitted. These facts support application of
the foregoing DC, shifting the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation of resulting
security concerns.
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. The facts
in this case support application of two of them:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
5
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation;
Applicant’s abuse of marijuana was casual and occasional, in social settings with
friends who were partaking. He voluntarily chose to stop such activity when he applied
for his current position, and his use was removed in time and place from any work-
related concerns. His free admission of this error in judgment is the only evidence that it
took place, and supports the credibility of his intention not to repeat such conduct. The
drug abuse ended two years ago while his living circumstances were far different than
today, and there is compelling evidence that drug abuse is unlikely to recur. Substantial
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(a) was accordingly established.
Applicant is now married with a young child, and is employed full time in a
demanding professional position. He no longer engages in recreational activities where
peer pressure to use drugs might exist. He has been abstinent since July 2014, and
offered a signed statement of intent not to abuse drugs in the future. He also testified
credibly concerning his regret about past drug abuse and intentions not to repeat it.
These facts establish further strong mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
6
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible and
mature individual who honestly admitted his previous occasional drug use, and has
thereby substantially eliminated the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress.
Recurrence of such conduct is unlikely, and his voluntary disclosure of that drug abuse
further confirms his integrity and respect for compliance with security policies. The
strong endorsements of his character by two experienced supervisors further confirmed
his rehabilitation and reliability. Overall, the record evidence creates no doubt as to
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
