 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ADP Case No. 15-03912 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2013, Applicant applied for a public trust position and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On December 21, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended and modified 
(Regulation); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
                                                          
 
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated July 1, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
adjudicators were unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a contract with the DOD. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such 
eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated January 12, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On February 24, 
2016, Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The 
case was assigned to me on March 23, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on April 
29, 2016. I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on May 19, 2016.  
 
 During the hearing, three Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 3), six 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE F), and one administrative exhibit, were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
June 1, 2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant 
took advantage of that opportunity. He timely submitted a number of additional 
documents, which were marked as AE G through AE J, and admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record closed on June 16, 2016. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied, with explanations, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a full-
time system programmer for a defense contractor since May 2013.2 He is seeking to 
retain his eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a contract with the 
DOD. He has never served in the U.S. military.3 He is a 2006 high school graduate and 
the recipient of a 2011 bachelor’s degree.4 Applicant has never been married.5 He has 
no children.6 
 
  
                                                          
2
 Tr. at 35-36, 40-41. 
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11; Tr. at 34-35. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 20. 
 
6
 Tr. at 35. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations7 
 
Applicant has a twin brother whose given name is so similar to Applicant’s given 
name that the first six letters of each name are identical, and their middle names, 
though different, start with the same letter, causing considerable confusion, especially 
for creditors and credit reporting agencies.8 This confusion has resulted in substantial 
misreporting of account responsibility. For example, when Applicant disputed certain 
accounts in his credit reports and attempted to have those credit reports corrected, 
Equifax identified Applicant as the name on the file, and initially rather than making 
proper corrections as to account responsibility, they simply noted that Applicant was 
“formerly known as” his twin brother.9 Some disputed listings were eventually deleted 
because they were, in fact, not Applicant’s responsibility. With that as background, there 
was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until sometime in mid-2011 when he 
claimed that “there are family financial issues that are vital to my family situation,”10 
without ever explaining what those issues might be. 
The SOR identified eight purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $28,380, as reflected by the July 2013 credit report, which is a combined 
credit report in the names of both Applicant and his twin brother,11 and the April 2015 
credit report.12 Those debts and their respective current status, according to the credit 
reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s 
comments regarding same, are described below:  
SOR ¶ 1.a.: This is a student loan with a high credit of $11,202 and a past-due 
amount of $15 that was placed for collection and charged off in the amount of $11,829 
(not $11,202 as alleged in the SOR).13 Applicant denied the allegation claiming that his 
student loan was being paid, and that the student loan referenced in the SOR was 
actually that of his twin brother.14 He disputed the account with Equifax as a mistaken 
identity, and following an investigation by Equifax, the account was deleted from 
                                                          
7
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits:  GE 1, supra note 1; GE 2 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated July 
11, 2013); GE 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated April 8, 2015); Answer to the SOR, dated January 12, 2016). More 
recent information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
8
 AE G (Letter, dated May 24, 2016; GE 1, supra note 1, at 22. It should also be noted that Applicant’s father 
shares the same given name with Applicant’s brother and the same middle name with Applicant. 
 
9
 AE F (Equifax Credit Report, dated February 9, 2016), at 2. See AE B (Equifax Credit Report, dated 
December 21, 2015); AE B (Equifax Dispute Confirmation, dated January 1, 2016). 
 
10
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
11
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 1-3. 
 
12
 GE 3, supra note 7. 
 
13
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 7. 
 
14
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1; AE C (Student Loan Correspondence, various dates), pertaining to 
Applicant’s current student loan; AE A (Credit Union Statements, various dates), pertaining to Applicant’s current 
student loan. See also AE D (Student Loan Application, dated December 23, 2006).  
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant’s credit report.15 Department Counsel conceded that the error had been 
identified and corrected.16 The account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.b.: This is a student loan with a high credit of $8,000, unpaid balance of 
$8,818, and past-due balance of $15 that was placed for collection and charged off.17 
Applicant denied the allegation claiming that the student loan referenced in the SOR 
was actually that of his twin brother.18 He disputed the account with Equifax as a 
mistaken identity, and following an investigation by Equifax, the account was deleted 
from Applicant’s credit report.19 Department Counsel conceded that the error had been 
identified and corrected.20 The account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.c.: This is an unspecified type of bank account with a high credit and 
unpaid balance of $7,940 that was placed for collection.21 Applicant denied the 
allegation claiming that the account referenced in the SOR was actually that of his twin 
brother.22 He disputed the account with Equifax as a mistaken identity, and following an 
investigation by Equifax, the account was deleted from Applicant’s credit report.23 
Department Counsel conceded that the error had been identified and corrected.24 The 
account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.d.: This is a medical account with a high credit and unpaid balance of 
$91 that was placed for collection for services rendered in August 2008.25 Applicant 
denied the allegation claiming that the account referenced in the SOR was actually that 
of his twin brother. He also noted that any medical charges made before 2012 should 
have been billed to his parents as he was then covered by their insurance.26 He did not 
dispute the account because it was no longer listed in his 2016 credit reports.27 Without 
                                                          
15
 Tr. at 26; AE E, supra note 7, at 1. Adding to the confusion is that Equifax used Applicant’s Social Security 
Number and his home address, but directed the response to Applicant’s brother. 
 
16
 Tr. at 26-29. 
 
17
 GE 3, supra note 7, at 2. 
 
18
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1. 
 
19
 Tr. at 29-30; AE E, supra note 7, at 1. Adding to the confusion is that Equifax used Applicant’s Social 
Security Number and his home address, but directed the response to Applicant’s brother. 
 
20
 Tr. at 29-30. 
 
21
 GE 3, supra note 7, at 2; Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1. 
 
22
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1. 
 
23
 Tr. at 31; AE E, supra note 7, at 1. Adding to the confusion is that Equifax used Applicant’s Social Security 
Number and his home address, but directed the response to Applicant’s brother. 
 
24
 Tr. at 30-31. 
 
25
 GE 3, supra note 7, at 2.  
 
26
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1. 
 
27
 Tr. at 31. 
 
5 
                                      
 
documentary confirmation that the account was either not Applicant’s responsibility, or 
that if it was his responsibility, it had been paid off, the account remains unresolved. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f.: These are two medical accounts with unpaid balances of 
$52 and $49 that were placed for collection for services rendered in in 2011.28 Applicant 
stated that the charges stemmed from an automobile accident in which he was involved, 
and that the other insurance was supposed to be responsible for the charges.29 Upon 
learning of the delinquencies, Applicant paid $101 to the collection agency holding both 
accounts.30 The accounts have been resolved. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.h.: These are two medical accounts with unpaid balances of 
$148 and $80 that were placed for collection.31 Applicant denied the allegations claiming 
that the accounts referenced in the SOR were actually those of his twin brother.32 He 
subsequently spoke with a representative of the collection agency and was advised that 
both accounts were, in fact, his twin brother’s. The collection agency refused to submit 
written confirmation of what Applicant was told.33 Nevertheless, neither account was 
listed in Applicant’s February 2016 Equifax credit report. 
Applicant’s personal budget indicates a monthly net income of $3,164; and 
normal monthly expenses, including student loan payments, of $2,864; leaving him a 
monthly remainder of $300 for saving or spending. He allocates $100 each month for 
his investment account.34 There is no evidence of any delinquent accounts which are 
Applicant’s responsibility. His finances are under control. Applicant’s purported financial 
problems are, as Department Counsel conceded, de minimis in nature, and they do not 
raise a current trustworthiness concern.35  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
                                                          
28
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 12-13. 
 
29
 Tr. at 32-33.  
 
30
 Tr. at 32-33; Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1; AE J (Credit Union Statement, dated January 26, 
2016); AE I (Statement, undated). 
 
31
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 12. At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend 
the SOR by substituting the date “July 11, 2013” for the date “April 8, 2015” in both SOR ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.h. to conform 
to the expected evidence. There being no objection, the motion was granted and the amendments made. Tr. at 12-
13. 
 
32
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 1-2. 
 
33
 AE I, supra note 30. 
 
34
 AE H (Personal Budget, undated). 
 
35
 Tr. at 49. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [position of public trust].”36 As Commander in 
Chief, the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on 
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to 
have access to such information. Positions designated as ADP-I and ADP-II are 
classified as “sensitive positions.”37 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment 
to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, 
reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”38 DOD contractor personnel 
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.39  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”40 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.41  
 
                                                          
36
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
37
 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, and C3.1.2.2. See also Regulation app. 10, ¶ 10.2. 
 
38
 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
39
 Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
40
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
41
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
Furthermore, security clearance determinations, and by inference, public trust 
determinations, should err, if they must, on the side of denials.42 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
Under AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying. Also, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise trustworthiness concerns. Applicant’s purported financial problems arose 
because of mistaken identity when the credit reporting agencies confused Applicant’s 
accounts with those of his twin brother. Of the eight accounts alleged in the SOR, five 
were determined to belong to Applicant’s twin brother. Applicant was not aware of the 
three remaining accounts. Once he learned the true status and responsibility of the 
accounts, he promptly resolved two of them, and he is currently researching the sole 
remaining account.  
 
While “[i]t is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can 
normally meet the substantial evidence standard. . . ,”43 in this unusual instance, the 
credit reports were an amalgamation of accounts related to both Applicant and his twin 
                                                          
42
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
43
 ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010). 
 
8 
                                      
 
brother. Applicant and his twin brother have given names so similar that the first six 
letters of each name are identical, and their middle names, though different, start with 
the same letter. One credit reporting agency combined Applicant’s Social Security 
Number and his home address, but directed communications to his brother. On another 
occasion, rather than making corrections, the reporting agency simply noted that 
Applicant was formerly known as his twin brother. One credit report, upon which part of 
the SOR was based, clearly reflected the names of both Applicant and his twin brother, 
a fact that should have justified if not required further scrutiny of its accuracy. There is 
no evidence of Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to pay his debts. AG ¶ 19(a) has not 
been established. While there were at least two, and possibly three, delinquent 
accounts with a combined unpaid balance of $192, two of which were promptly 
resolved, the remaining debt of $91 does not constitute a history of not meeting financial 
obligations. Those debts are de minimis in nature, and they do not raise a current 
trustworthiness concern. AG ¶ 19(c) has not been established.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.44   
     
There is minimal evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He had two, 
and possibly three, medical accounts, totaling $192 placed for collection. 
 
 The mitigating evidence is more substantial and compelling. There is no 
evidence of misuse of information technology systems, mishandling protected 
information, or substance abuse. Applicant is the victim of identity confusion because 
his twin brother and he have such similar names and the creditors and credit reporting 
                                                          
44
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
agencies did not bother to scrutinize the information they reported as accurate, and they 
initially gave superficial treatment to Applicant’s efforts to sanitize and correct the 
financial information appearing in his credit reports. There is no evidence of fiscal 
irresponsibility. Applicant maintains a budget and routinely saves $300 each month for 
savings and investments. In the absence of evidence of delinquent accounts which are 
Applicant’s responsibility, there are clear indications that Applicant’s finances are in 
good order and under control. 
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.h.:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position to support a contract with DOD.  Eligibility is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
  
