 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02833 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on February 5, 2013. 
(Item 3) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
November 14, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
 
2 
 
 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015. He denied three (SOR 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.c) of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He admitted the remaining debt. 
(SOR 1.d) He elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 6, dated 
January 14, 2016) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
January 15, 2016. Applicant received a the file of relevant material (FORM) on February 
10, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant filed a timely reply 
to the FORM. (Item 7) I was assigned the case on June 9, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI. Applicant did not object to admission of the PSI when he responded to the 
FORM. He has waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI. I will consider 
information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file. I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old, and has been an electrician for a defense contractor 
since March 2012. He was born in Peru and came to the United States in September 
1996. He served in the United States military from April 1999 until May 2005, including a 
tour in Iraq. He received an honorable discharge as a sergeant (E-5). Based on his 
military service, he became a United States citizen in October 2004. He married in 
September 2000 and divorced in 2010. He has one child from this marriage and is 
current with is child support obligations. He married again in April 2012. (Item 2, e-QIP; 
Item 4, PSI)  
 
The SOR lists and credit reports (Item 4, dated March 12, 2015; and Item 5, 
dated January 18, 2013) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a 
foreclosed mortgage debt past due for $106,173 (SOR 1.a); a leased car debt for 
$6,608 (SOR 1.b); a telephone service debt in collection for $561 (SOR 1.c); a 
mortgage debt charged off (SOR 1.d); and a cable television and telephone debt in 
collection for $207 (SOR 1.e). The total amount of the delinquent debt is approximately 
$113,000. The majority of the debt is from the foreclosed mortgage debt. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant reported the delinquent debts on his e-QIP. The OPM security 
investigator in the PSI questioned Applicant extensively about the status of his finances. 
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to circumstances from the separation and 
divorce from his first wife. In response to the FORM, Applicant provided documents to 
establish payment of the delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant and his first wife purchased a house when they married. The debts 
listed at SOR 1.a and 1.d are for the same mortgage. The house lost value in the 
housing crisis in 2008. Applicant was able to accomplish a short sale of the house and 
the mortgages have been satisfied. (Response to FORM, Bank Documents, dated 
March 11, 2016, and settlement notice dated January 28, 2013) Applicant and his wife 
leased a car for his mother-in-law to use. The car was returned at the end of the lease 
in August 2007 with high mileage resulting in an additional charge of $6,608. Applicant 
settled the debt with the car manufacturer. (Response to FORM, Car Dealer Letter, 
dated March 11, 2016)  
 
Applicant disputed the debt to the telephone company. The dispute was settled 
by the creditor in Applicant’s favor and removed from his credit report. (Response to 
FORM, letter, dated March 14, 2016) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debt as 
shown by credit reports, answers to financial questions on the e-QIP, and responses to 
financial questions from the security investigator. The information raises security 
concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The evidence indicates an inability and not an unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
 
The mitigating conditions apply. Applicant incurred delinquent debt when he and 
his first wife divorced. The house they purchased lost value in the 2008 housing crises. 
He leased a car for his mother-in- law but she used it more than allowed under the 
lease resulting in an additional charge. He disputed a telephone bill and the company 
resolved it is Applicant’s favor. Applicant acted responsibly and reasonably by working 
with his creditors to settle, resolve, and dispute the debts. Applicant established his 
good-faith initiative to pay his debts. For a good-faith effort, there must be an ability to 
repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. Good 
faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation.  
 
Applicant provided sufficient documents to establish that he resolved and paid all 
of the SOR delinquent debts. He showed a meaningful track record of debt resolution. 
By paying or resolving his debts, Applicant has shown that he acted with 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards 
his finances. Applicant has shown that he is managing his personal financial obligations 
reasonably and responsibly, and his financial problems are behind him. There is ample 
evidence of responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliability. Based on all of the 
financial information, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security concerns based 
on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
due to his separation and divorce and the housing market crisis in 2008. He presented 
evidence that he paid or resolved all of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. Applicant 
presented sufficient information to establish that he acted reasonably and responsibly 
towards his finances, and that he will continue to responsibly manage his financial 
obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
