 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02692 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 23, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to have failed to file his Federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2007 through 2012. He failed to present sufficient evidence that all 
those tax returns have subsequently been filed. Additionally, he had $4,327 in 
delinquent debt. He resolved two of his five delinquent debts. He failed to show he has 
taken responsible actions on his remaining financial obligations. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2013, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On January 16, 2016, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
On February 19, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 20, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
April 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 12, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The 
record was left open for receipt of additional documents until June 27, 2016. Applicant 
submitted 33 pages, marked AE A through AE D. Department Counsel had no 
objections to AE A through AE D, and they were admitted into evidence. Department 
Counsel also offered five Appeal Decisions for review. They were marked as HE II. The 
record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 26, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married and 
has four minor children. He is a high school graduate. He has worked for his current 
employer since December 2012. (GE 1, Tr. 28.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to have failed to file his Federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 2012. Additionally, he was alleged 
to be delinquent on five debts, totaling $4,327. Applicant admitted the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, and 1.g. (Answer.) He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.f. His 
debts are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 
6.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant admitted that he failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2007 through 2012, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He attributed his 
failure to file to “irresponsible” behavior. He stated, “I knew it wasn’t the right thing to do 
and I know it would catch up to me.” (Tr. 21-22.) He testified that he filed his Federal 
and state tax returns for 2007 through 2012 in 2013. (Tr. 33.) Applicant provided no 
documentation to show he filed his 2007 or 2008 Federal or state income tax returns. 
His 2009 Federal Income tax return was dated in April 2011, although his tax preparer 
told him in an undated cover letter that it was due by April 15, 2010. His 2009 state 
income tax return was also prepared by a tax professional, however there is no 
documentation establishing if or when it was filed. (AE B at 1-6.) His 2010 Federal 
Income tax return was submitted to Applicant by his tax preparer on April 11, 2011, to 
be filed after Applicant signed and returned a form. There is no documentation to show 
he signed and returned the form, which was required to file the 2010 tax return 
electronically. His 2010 state income tax return was filed electronically by the tax 
preparer. (AE B at 11.) The 2011 Federal and state income tax returns were prepared 
and submitted to Applicant for signature and submission. However, no documentation 
substantiates that Applicant filed those document. (AE B at 7-10.) His 2012 Federal and 
state Income tax return was prepared, as evidenced by a letter from his tax 
professional, but he did not present documentation to show it was filed. (AE B at 12-17.) 
His 2013 through 2015 Federal and state income tax returns were prepared by a tax 
professional and filed electronically. (AE B at 18-30.)  
 
3 
 
Applicant testified that as a result of his failure to file his income tax returns, his 
wages were garnished by his state to repay a state tax debt. Additionally, a tax levy was 
filed against him by the Federal Government to repay his delinquent IRS tax. The 
garnishment has been satisfied, and the IRS tax levy has been removed and is 
satisfied. (GE 2; GE 6; Tr. 27, 38-41.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent medical debt in the approximate amount 
of $125, as identified in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt has been delinquent since 2011. Applicant 
testified that this debt was for medical care after he sustained an injury at work. He 
thought his employer would pay for the medical bills, but the employer did not. Applicant 
presented a copy of his bank account statement showing that a payment of $128.81 
was made to this creditor on May 17, 2016. This debt is resolved. (GE 4; AE C; Tr. 23-
24, 41-42, 61.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent collection account in the approximate 
amount of $1,982, as identified in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt has been delinquent since at 
least March 2015. It is for cellular telephone service. Applicant claimed that this debt 
was for equipment that he returned. He believes it was satisfied when he returned the 
equipment. However, he did not offer documentation to support his claim. This debt is 
unresolved. (GE 5; AE D; Tr. 24, 43-45.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent electricity account in the approximate 
amount of $201, as identified in SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt has been delinquent since July 
2014. Applicant presented a letter dated May 14, 2016, which stated this debt is now 
paid in full. It is resolved. (GE 5; AE A; Tr. 24, 45.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent collection account in the approximate 
amount of $1,009, as identified in SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt has been delinquent since 2013. 
It is for cellular telephone service. Applicant denied this debt because he does not 
believe he should be liable for the charges he incurred while overseas. He claimed to 
have sent the company a dispute letter that was not resolved in his favor. He is still 
liable for this debt. It is unresolved.  (GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 24-25, 46.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent collection account in the approximate 
amount of $1,010, as identified in SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt has been delinquent since 
2013. Applicant testified that he signed a contract with this cell phone carrier, but then 
stopped using the carrier because of bad reception. He admitted liability for this debt, 
but produced no documentation to show he has taken any actions to resolve it. (GE 3; 
Tr. 25-26, 47.)  
 
Applicant testified that he is able to meet his monthly expenses. He claimed to 
have money left over at the end of the month. He testified he has approximately $1,100 
in his checking account and $12,000 in a 401K savings plan. (Tr. 50-53.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has not filed his Federal or state income tax returns for 2007 or 2008. 
Further, his documentation fails to establish he filed Federal income tax returns in 2009-
2012, or his state income tax returns for 2010 through 2012, in a timely manner as 
required by law. He admitted he was irresponsible. Additionally, Applicant has a history 
of financial indebtedness documented by the credit reports, which substantiate all of the 
alleged delinquent debts. His debts remained delinquent for several years, despite 
Applicant’s testimony that he had money left over at the end of each month. The 
evidence raises security concerns under all three of these disqualifying conditions, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has resolved only two of the five 
delinquent debts and failed to submit sufficient documentation to show he has filed his 
delinquent Federal and state income tax returns. Given his lack of effective action on 
the remaining debts and tax return filings, he has not demonstrated that future financial 
problems are unlikely. Further, the Appeal Board has stated: 
 
Failure to comply with Federal and/or state tax laws suggests that an 
applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established government rules 
and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is 
essential for protecting classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) . . . By failing to file those tax 
returns in a timely manner, Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree 
of good judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to 
classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 30, 2014).1  
 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) was not established. 
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for his behavior in failing to file his Federal and 
state tax returns in a timely manner. He did not attribute his inaction on his 
delinquencies to any circumstance beyond his control. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) was 
not established. 
 
 Applicant presented no documentation that he has sought counseling for his 
financial problems. Further, he failed to show clear indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. Only two debts have been addressed 
in a meaningful manner. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 
20(d). 
 
 Applicant provided no documented proof of any disputes with the SOR-listed 
creditors. AG ¶ 20(e) has not been established. 
 
 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
mature adult and responsible for his choices and financial obligations. Since 2008, he 
has not acted responsibly with respect to his finances. His irresponsibility in failing to file 
his Federal and state income taxes shows he lacks the judgment and maturity to hold a 
security clearance at this time. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
