 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-02810 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 In 1992, Applicant was convicted of DUI. In 2014, Applicant allowed his 13-year-
old son to drive his truck on the interstate. Applicant rode along with his son in the truck, 
and Applicant’s blood-alcohol content (BAC) was .139. Applicant was charged with child 
endangerment. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated; however, criminal conduct 
and alcohol consumption security concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified 
information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On May 15, 2013, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing or security clearance application (SCA). (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On October 26, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct), G (alcohol consumption), and E (personal conduct).  
 
On November 19, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On February 2, 
2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 17, 2016, the case was 
assigned to another administrative judge, and on April 4, 2016, the case was transferred 
to me. On April 4, 2016, Applicant requested a hearing on May 2, 2016. (HE 4) On April 
12, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing, setting the hearing for May 2, 2016. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered nine exhibits, and Applicant 
offered six exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection. (Transcript 
(Tr.) 12-14; Government Exhibit (GE) 1-9; Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1-6) On May 12, 2016, 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a major defense contractor, who has 
worked as an avionics installer for several years. (Tr. 17, 31; GE 1) He has been 
employed by the same contractor for 20 years. (AE E) In 1983, Applicant graduated 
from high school. (Tr. 9, 37, GE 1) He was in the Navy for ten years; when he left active 
duty he was a petty officer second class; and he received an honorable discharge in 
1995. (Tr. 15-16, 28-29; AE C) In 1996, he married, and he has two children, who are 
ages 11 and 16. (Tr. 18; GE 1) He has held a security clearance for 30 years, and there 
is no evidence of security violations.  
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was 17 years old. (GE 8) In 1992, 
when Applicant was 24 years old and serving in the Navy, he was stopped by the police 
and arrested for driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol. (Tr. 27-28; AE A) 
Applicant’s blood-alcohol content was .15. (Tr. 27; GE 9) He pleaded guilty to DUI. (GE 
7) He was required to attend alcohol-related counseling for three months, and two 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings a week for eight weeks. (GE 9) He received 
probation before judgment. (Tr. 27-28) Applicant believed the case was dismissed after 
he successfully completed one year of probation. (Tr. 28)  
 
Applicant has a history of letting his son drive without a driver’s license. (Tr. 21-
22, 45) In April 2014, Applicant drank six to eight, 12 ounce beers at baseball games 
over about five hours. (Tr. 19, 24, 41; GE 4) Applicant drove himself home after the 
game, and then he and his son decided to go to a Dairy Queen. (Tr. 20-21, 42; GE 4) 
Applicant did not believe he was intoxicated at the time he drove home from the 
 
3 
                                         
 
baseball game. (Tr. 42) Applicant permitted his 13-year-old1 son to drive Applicant’s 
truck to the Dairy Queen and then back toward home. (Tr. 20-21, 41; GE 4) At the time 
he permitted his son to drive, Applicant believed he was impaired by alcohol but not 
drunk. (Tr. 43) On the way home, his son went outside his lane on the interstate, and 
they were stopped by the police. (Tr. 20, 45) His son did not have a learner’s permit or 
license to drive. (Tr. 21) The police officer smelled alcohol on Applicant’s breath, gave 
him a breathalyzer test, and arrested him. (Tr. 22) His BAC was .139. (Tr. 43; GE 3) 
The officer described “observations of extreme intoxication” of Applicant. (GE 3) 
Applicant was charged with endangering the welfare of a child and allowing an 
unlicensed person to operate a motor vehicle. (GE 4 at 4) Endangering the welfare of a 
child is a felony under state law. Applicant disclosed his arrest to his security officer. (Tr. 
35) In September 2014, he pleaded guilty to a “stop sign violation with a fine of $527.50” 
and “improper lane change” with a fine of $527.50. (GE 4 at 5)   
 
Applicant said his alcohol consumption before letting his son drive did not affect 
his decision to let his son drive. (Tr. 48) This was the first occasion he permitted his son 
to drive on the interstate. (Tr. 48) His son was driving at the speed limit. (Tr. 48) 
 
The only time Applicant drove while impaired by alcohol was when he was 
caught back in 1992 and arrested for DUI. (Tr. 49) He never thought he had a problem 
with alcohol. (Tr. 49)  He may occasionally consume 12 beers over a weekend. (Tr. 30, 
40) His alcohol consumption is sporadic. (Tr. 30, 40) His most recent alcohol 
consumption was three drinks in March 2016, and he drank 12 beers over a weekend in 
February 2016. (Tr. 40-41) 
 
After his arrest in 2014, Applicant completed a questionnaire supplied through his 
employee assistance program. (Tr. 36; AE F) Based on the questionnaire, the licensed 
clinical social worker who assessed Applicant advised Applicant he did not have a 
problem with alcohol or any alcohol-related disorders. (Tr. 36; AE F) He did not receive 
any alcohol-related counseling or therapy after his 2014 arrest. (Tr. 50) 
  
Applicant does not believe he has an alcohol problem. (Tr. 31) He conceded his 
alcohol consumption had led to questionable judgment, and he accepted responsibility 
for his actions. (Tr. 32) He showed poor judgment in connection with the events of 1992 
and 2014 involving the police and courts; however, he did not generally show poor 
judgment and especially in the realm of security. (Tr. 33) His behavior had not changed 
after his 2014 alcohol-related incident; however, he is more aware of alcohol in his 
vicinity and he attempts to avoid problems. (Tr. 34) 
 
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant provided character references from four coworkers and supervisors.2 
The general sense of the letters is that Applicant is diligent, dedicated, reliable, 
                                            
1Applicant’s son was not eligible to apply for a learner’s permit until age 15. (Tr. 44) 
 
2The four character letters are at AE D. 
 
4 
                                         
 
trustworthy, remorseful about his conduct, and rehabilitated. The character references 
support reinstatement of his security clearance.  
 
Applicant received the following awards during his Navy service: National 
Defense Service Medal (NDSM); Southwest Asia Service Medal (SWASM) (2 awards);   
Good Conduct Medal (GCM) (2 awards); Navy “E” Ribbon; Sea Service Deployment 
Ribbon (SSDR) (2 awards); and Flag Letter of Commendation (LOC). (Tr. 29; AE C) 
 
 Applicant received several appreciation awards, performance certificates, 
certificates of recognition, and certificates of appreciation from his employer. (AE E) He 
has made important contributions to the success of his employer and the DOD. (AE E) 
Applicant has worked hard over his decades of service to support the DOD. (Tr. 38-39) 
He and his family have made sacrifices to contribute to his company and DOD. (Tr. 38-
39) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
 
5 
                                         
 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. Applicant’s SOR alleges two alcohol-related 
incidents involving the police and courts. In 1992, Applicant had a DUI with a BAC of 
.15; and in 2014, he was arrested and charged with endangering the welfare of a child 
and allowing an unlicensed person to operate a motor vehicle. His BAC when he was 
 
6 
                                         
 
arrested in 2014 was .139. His BACs are high enough to conclude Applicant engaged in 
binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired judgment.3   
  
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
                                            
3Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted 
definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The 
definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 
NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ 
winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf. 
 
7 
                                         
 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s SOR alleges and the 
record establishes two alcohol-related incidents involving the police and courts. 
Applicant has not attended any alcohol rehabilitation or counseling programs after his 
2014 arrest. He has not provided “a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program” that includes an acknowledgement of Applicant’s two 
arrests and BACs. The checklist he provided does not include sufficient information 
about his alcohol-consumption history for the LCSW to make a credible diagnosis and 
prognosis.   
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of 
substantial alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless 
there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR 
Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).     
 
After careful consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption, Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption, I have continuing doubts about 
the risks of poor decisions after excessive alcohol consumption. It is too soon to 
conclude alcohol-related incidents involving the police and courts are unlikely to recur. 
Not enough time has elapsed without alcohol-related misconduct to eliminate doubt 
about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Alcohol 
consumption concerns are not mitigated.   
   
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and 
“(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
  
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. Applicant had a DUI conviction in 1992, and in 
2014, Applicant was charged with endangering the welfare of a child and allowing an 
unlicensed person to operate a motor vehicle. In September 2014, he pleaded guilty to 
a “stop sign violation with a fine of $527.50” and “improper lane change” with a fine of 
 
8 
                                         
 
$527.50. Based on his description of allowing a 13-year-old juvenile, and his .139 BAC 
when he authorized his son to drive on the interstate, I conclude that under state law he 
committed the felony of child endangerment, even though he was permitted to plead 
guilty to a lesser offense.      
  
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply for the reasons stated in the previous 
section. More time must elapse without criminal conduct before criminal conduct 
concerns will be mitigated.      
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The LOR alleges three disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 16 that are relevant in 
this case. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d)(3) and 16(e) read: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
9 
                                         
 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
  AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d)(3) do not apply. As indicated in the previous sections, 
Guidelines J and G are the appropriate guidelines for Applicant’s conduct. The previous 
sections indicate sufficient evidence for an adverse determination. AG ¶ 16(e) applies 
because his criminal conduct adversely affects his personal, professional, and 
community standing.   
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists three conditions, which may mitigate security concerns in this case. 
The three mitigating conditions are as follows:  
  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(e) apply. Applicant paid his fines and expressed remorse for 
his conduct. He is not on probation period. Security officials, the courts, and law 
enforcement are aware of his misconduct, and he is not subject to coercion. Personal 
conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
  
 
10 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a major defense contractor, who has 
worked as an avionics installer for several years. He has been employed by the same 
contractor for 20 years. He was in the Navy for ten years; when he left active duty he 
was a petty officer second class; and he received an honorable discharge in 1995. 
Applicant received the following awards during his Navy service: NDSM; SWASM (2 
awards); GCM (2 awards); Navy “E” Ribbon; SSDR (2 awards); and Flag LOC.  
 
Four coworkers and supervisors lauded Applicant’s diligence, dedication, 
reliability, trustworthiness, remorse about his conduct, rehabilitation, and supported 
reinstatement of his security clearance. Applicant received several appreciation 
awards, performance certificates, certificates of recognition, and certificates of 
appreciation from his employer. He has made important contributions to the success of 
his employer and the DOD. Applicant has worked hard over his decades of service to 
support the DOD. He and his family have made sacrifices to contribute to his company 
and DOD. He has held a security clearance for 30 years, and there is no evidence of 
security violations.  
 
The factors weighing against continuation of his security clearance are more 
substantial than the mitigating circumstances. Applicant had a DUI conviction in 1992. 
In 2014, Applicant was charged with endangering the welfare of a child and allowing an 
unlicensed person to operate a motor vehicle. His description of the events in 2014 and 
police report establish that he authorized his 13-year-old son to drive on the interstate 
while Applicant was intoxicated with a BAC of .139. His son was unable to maintain their 
truck in his lane, and his son was endangered as he operated the vehicle at the speed 
 
11 
                                         
 
limit. Applicant said he would have still authorized his son to drive even if he had not 
been impaired by alcohol consumption.      
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated security concerns 
lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at 
this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant 
cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security clearance 
in the future. With more time without excessive alcohol consumption and criminal 
conduct, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, alcohol 
consumption and criminal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
