 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04611 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 22, 2014. On 
December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline E. The DOD CAF acted under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, 
Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 13, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 
28, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on May 4, 2016. On the same day, the 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for May 25, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
but did not present the testimony of any witnesses or submit any documentary 
evidence. I kept the record open until June 10, 2016, to enable him to submit 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old electrical engineer employed by defense contractors 
since August 2014. (Tr. 25-26.) He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant grew up in an underprivileged community in a large city. His mother 
was mentally ill and his father left the family when Applicant was seven years old. (Tr. 
22.) He was a member of a gang from age 15 to 25. (Tr. 27.) While a gang member, he 
used marijuana frequently, and he supported himself by selling marijuana. (Tr. 30.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 gang-related and drug-related activities and 6 employment-
related events. For clarity, the specific paragraphs of the SOR are parenthetically cited 
below in the factual narrative. 
  
 In September 1994, Applicant was charged with aggravated battery likely to 
cause great bodily harm (SOR ¶ 1.q). He was charged with battery in December 1994 
(SOR ¶ 1.p) and February 1995 (SOR 1.o) (GX 2 at 2.) He testified that these charges 
probably were based on gang fights. He testified that he was charged with the 
December 1994 battery solely because he was present during a fight. (Tr. 29.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct in 
November 1992 and May 1997 (SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.r). There is no evidence in the record 
supporting these allegations. 
 
 In July 1995, Applicant was charged with possession of 5-10 grams of cannabis 
(SOR ¶ 1.n). (GX 2 at 3.) He admitted this charge but could not remember any details 
about it. (Tr. 30.) 
 
 In February 1996, Applicant was charged with possession of under 15 grams of 
cocaine (SOR ¶ 1.m). (GX 2 at 3.) He testified that on this occasion he had $1,000 in 
his possession from selling marijuana and he intended to use the money to buy a car. 
Although he sold cocaine while a member of the gang, the $1,000 was from selling 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
marijuana, not cocaine. He testified that he never used cocaine. He denied having any 
drugs in his possession on this occasion. The police seized the $1,000. (Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 In February 1998 and April 2000, Applicant was charged with possession of 
cannabis (SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k). Applicant admitted these allegations and testified that 
the marijuana was for his personal use. (Tr. 32-33.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he left the gang in 2001, when he moved to another city 
and enrolled in a university. (Tr. 34.) He had a part-time job working in the university 
cafeteria, but he did not earn enough to support himself. Around 2003, he started selling 
small quantities of marijuana to earn additional money. (Tr. 35-38.)  
 
 In March 2004, Applicant was charged with assault, possession of drug 
paraphernalia, and selling cannabis (SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.i). (GX 2 at 3.) At the time, he was 
living in student housing and selling marijuana. He was afraid that his roommate would 
“turn on him,” and he tried to make the roommate move out. He was involved in a 
physical altercation with his roommate, who called the police and told them that 
Applicant had marijuana in the room. (Tr. 38.) Applicant was convicted of possessing 
10-30 grams of cannabis, a felony, and sentenced to probation. The other charges were 
nolle prosequi. (GX 1 at 41.) 
 
 Applicant continued to smoke marijuana until 2008. He stopped smoking 
marijuana because it made it difficult for him to focus and was interfering with his school 
work. He testified that he has not used any illegal drugs since 2008. (Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from college in December 2012 with a bachelor’s degree in 
electrical engineering. (Tr. 25.) He worked full time at various non-government jobs 
while attending college. He testified that he would go to work at 11:00 p.m., work until 
7:00 a.m., go directly to school from work, sleep three hours, and repeat the cycle. (Tr. 
23, 43-44.) He worked as a concierge for several apartment communities, manning the 
front desk during the evening and overnight hours. He was fired from a concierge 
position in September 2007 for falling asleep at work (SOR ¶ 1.f). He left a concierge 
position in March 2009 by mutual agreement because he was falling asleep at work 
(SOR ¶ 1.e). He was fired from a concierge position in February 2012 for routine 
tardiness (SOR ¶ 1.d). He testified that his falling asleep was not intentional and not 
intended to show disrespect for his employer, but his jobs were second in priority to 
graduating from college. (Tr. 44-46.) His tardiness in 2012 was due to his participation 
in a research project at school, in addition to his classes and his employment. (Tr. 47.) 
 
In May 2013, Applicant left a concierge position at a commercial location by 
mutual agreement, after falling asleep at work (SOR ¶ 1.c). (GX 1 at 18-26.) This 
incident occurred after he graduated from college. He testified that he was looking for a 
job during the day, worrying about finding a job, not sleeping well, and working at this 
job at night. (Tr. 58-61.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from May 2013 to January 2014. He worked as a 
railcar electrical installer from January to March 2014. He found the work unsatisfying 
and not a good use of his expertise as an engineer. As a result, he underperformed, 
was notified of his substandard performance, and left by mutual agreement in March 
2014 (SOR ¶ 1.b). (Tr. 50-53.)  
 
Applicant worked as a concierge in an apartment building in May and June 2014 
and was fired after becoming belligerent with his supervisor (SOR ¶ 1.a). (GX 1 at 15-
18.) He testified that this incident occurred when he allowed a security officer to enter 
an apartment without notifying his site supervisor. The supervisor scolded him in the 
presence of his immediate supervisor and several residents. He shouted back at the 
supervisor, and he was fired. (Tr. 55.) 
 
 One of Applicant’s college professors submitted a letter describing Applicant’s 
performance as a student. The professor described Applicant as “readily able to apply 
complex theoretical principles of communication systems engineering to general 
problem solving.” He states that Applicant “consistently demonstrated commitment, 
dedication and the highest level of excellence in the roles he has assumed.” He found 
Applicant to be highly organized, dependable, and supportive of others with whom he 
interacted. (AX A.)  
 
 Applicant’s former career manager and current supervisor submitted a letter 
stating that he was impressed with Applicant’s flexibility and eagerness to take on new 
challenges. He stated that Applicant recognized that he need to learn how to be a 
productive employee, and he took advantage of every opportunity to expand his 
knowledge and skills. (AX B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” The issue in this case is whether Applicant has 
put his gang-related and drug-related conduct behind him and has become able and 
willing to comply with rules and regulations. His history of misconduct and neglect of 
workplace duties raises the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) is established. Applicant’s drug-related and gang-related conduct was 
not minor or infrequent, and it did not occur under unique circumstances. The issue is 
whether the conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If 
the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
 
7 
 
demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant left the gang in 2001 and stopped his drug involvement in 2008. After 
2008, his worked-related misconduct was the product of sleep deprivation and a heavy 
academic schedule. His last employment-related incident, a relatively minor act of 
insubordination, was more than two years ago. His current supervisor indicates that he 
is well on his way to becoming a valuable and productive employee. He has not 
repeated his earlier inattentive or insubordinate conduct. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is 
established. 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is established. Applicant has acknowledged his past. He left the 
gang, moved to a new community, and doggedly pursued a college degree as his ticket 
to a better life. He impressed his college professor with his commitment and dedication. 
He has impressed his current supervisor with his flexibility and eagerness to succeed.   
 AGA ¶ 17(e) is established. Applicant has been open and candid about his past 
throughout the security clearance process. He is not vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline(s), but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, contrite, and credible at the hearing. He was 25 
years old when he decided to leave the gang and make a better life for himself. He is 
now 40 years old, a college graduate, and employed by a defense contractor. His 
 
8 
 
transition from gang member to a college-educated engineer has been remarkable. He 
is older than most recent college graduates and relatively new to the professional 
workplace. He is still learning some of the social and personal skills necessary to 
succeed as a professional engineer. However, he is determined to establish himself as 
a responsible, reliable member of the defense community, and his track record to date 
is encouraging. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
