 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03184 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from 2010 to at least 
May 2015. His evidence is insufficient to mitigate the drug involvement security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 25, 2014. 
On December 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 16, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 5, 
2016, was mailed to Applicant on 10 February 2016. Applicant acknowledged receipt of 
                                            
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
the FORM on February 17, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to 
the FORM and to provide material in rebuttal, extenuation, and mitigation. Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM or submit any information after his receipt of the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on August 23, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency between October 2010 
and May 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He denied that he intends to use marijuana in the future or 
to associate with his drug-using friends and associates. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c). His 
admissions are incorporated in the findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old engineer working for a federal contractor. He received 
his bachelor’s degree in May 2013, and as of August 2014, he was continuing his post-
graduate studies on a part-time basis. He started working with his current employer, a 
federal contractor, in April 2014. He has never been married and has no children. This 
is Applicant’s first security clearance application. 
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity) of his 
2014 SCA that he illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from about October 
2010 to June 2014. (FORM, Item 2) He stated that he “smoked marijuana on occasion 
when offered by friends at parties or when a few friends gathered and were all 
smoking.” He estimated the total number of times he smoked marijuana was less than 
two dozen – once every few months. He stated his intent to illegally use marijuana in 
the future and explained: 
 
If it becomes fully legalized I might smoke more often, but if it doesn’t I 
won’t actively seek it out. Most probably participation is if it’s offered by a 
friend. I don’t see this substance as particularly harmful. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in November 2014. He 
told the investigator that he smoked marijuana about once every three months. Each 
time he took two to three hits from a marijuana bong. The marijuana was provided by 
friends while hanging out at their homes. He did not disclose his friends’ names. 
Applicant explained he used marijuana for enjoyment - because it made him feel good. 
He claimed he was not dependent on marijuana and had not received any counseling or 
treatment. Applicant expressed his intent to continue using marijuana when offered by 
friends. He would use it more frequently if legalized. Applicant stated that he continued 
to associate with friends that use marijuana and his family and friends know about his 
use of marijuana. 
 
In his November 2015 answers to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant disclosed that 
his most recent use of marijuana was on May 31, 2015. He noted the frequency of use 
was “once or twice a year as of the last few years, was every few months before.” He 
 
3 
 
 
stated his intent to discontinue smoking or eating marijuana for the foreseeable future. 
He noted that if it is legalized at the state and federal level he may consider using again.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his answer to the interrogatories that he purchased 
marijuana legally in another state. He noted that his state prohibits the use of marijuana 
and he stated he will not seek out marijuana. Applicant denied he continues to 
associate with his drug-using friends or that he frequents places where marijuana or 
other illegal drugs are used.   
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that if his continued use of marijuana 
would hinder his ability to obtain and possess a security clearance he would not 
consume marijuana at any time in the future. He submitted a written statement of intent 
to not consume marijuana in the future. The statement does not include a provision for 
the automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant also stated that he does not regularly associate with people who 
illegally use marijuana or other drugs. He claimed that in the last few years he only 
associated with people that purchased marijuana legally (in a state that allows 
recreational marijuana or with a legal marijuana medicinal card). He also promised that 
if associating with these individuals, would hinder his ability to obtain and possess a 
security clearance he would disassociate from those individuals and avoid places where 
illegal drugs are used.  
 
Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to show that his use of marijuana 
was legal or pursuant to a prescription issued by a duly qualified medical professional. 
The record is silent as to the circumstances surrounding his acquisition of marijuana, 
the extent of his contacts with his drug-using friends and associates, and whether 
Applicant has made permanent lifestyle changes to avoid illegal drugs in the future.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from around October 
2010 to at least May 2015. He expressed his intent to continue using marijuana in his 
August 2014 SCA and during his November 2014 interview with a government 
investigator. He also indicated his continued association with drug-using friends and 
associates. More recently, in his December 2015 answer to the SOR, he denied any 
further intent to illegally use marijuana, and any further association with his drug-using 
friends and associates. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and  
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;   
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions are fully applicable, and do not 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s use of marijuana was frequent, and it is 
recent. He expressed his intent to continue using marijuana and associating with illegal 
drug users as recently as November 2014.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his August 2014 SCA that his most recent marijuana use 
occurred in June 2014. He was also made aware of the Government’s concerns about 
his illegal drug use during a November 2014 interview with a government investigator. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant continued his use of marijuana until at least May 2015. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant promised that he would not consume 
marijuana at any time in the future or associate with his drug-using friends and 
associates. He submitted a written statement of intent to not consume marijuana in the 
future, but the statement does not provide for the automatic revocation of his clearance 
 
6 
 
 
for any violation. Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to show that his use of 
marijuana was legal or pursuant to a prescription issued by a duly qualified medical 
professional. The record is silent as to the circumstances surrounding his acquisition of 
marijuana, the extent of his contacts with his drug-using friends and associates, and 
whether Applicant has made permanent lifestyle changes to avoid illegal drugs in the 
future.  
 
Considering the period during which Applicant illegally used marijuana, his past 
expressed intent to continue his use of marijuana and his association with illegal drug 
users, his evidence is insufficient to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. 
Additional time without the illegal use of marijuana is needed for Applicant to establish 
that he has made permanent lifestyle changes to abstain from using marijuana and that 
he has disassociated from his drug-using friends.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for a 
federal contractor since April 2014. He illegally used marijuana with varying frequency 
from 2010 to at least May 2015. His use of marijuana continues to raise questions about 
his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and ability to comply with the law, or to protect 
classified information. He failed to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
