1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03077 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 24, 2014. On 
October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, 
Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 
2 
 
11, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. On April 26, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for May 12, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and presented the testimony of three witnesses. I kept the record open until 
May 27, 2016, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. (Tr. 23-24.) He timely 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through I, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 26, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations, with 
explanations. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Navy from June 1977 to December 2002 and retired as a senior chief 
petty officer (pay grade E-8). He has worked for federal contractors supporting another 
government agency since his retirement. He held security clearances from the DOD 
while in the Navy and from another government agency for about 14 years. (Tr. 8.) His 
clearance was suspended in February 2008 because of security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence), but it was reinstated after those concerns were 
resolved. (GX 1 at 63-64.) 
 
 While on active duty, Applicant was responsible for installing and maintaining 
security alarm systems aboard Navy ships. As a civilian, he worked in sensitive 
locations requiring the highest levels of security clearances. He directly supported 
senior military and civilian officials during Desert Storm. He has never had a security 
violation.  
 
 Applicant married in June 1977 and divorced in November 2002. His first wife 
receives 42% of his retired pay, based on their years of marriage while he was on active 
duty. He married his current wife in December 2005. He has an adult daughter from his 
first marriage and a nine-year-old daughter and a five-year-old son from his current 
marriage.  
 
 Applicant met his current wife while on an extended overseas assignment. She is 
a native of the country where they met. About four months after they met, they were 
engaged to be married. After they married in December 2005, Applicant sponsored her 
to immigrate to the United States, and he purchased an airline ticket for her to travel 
from her native country to the United States. She came to the United States in 
September 2006. About three weeks after she arrived in the United States, Applicant 
learned that she had exchanged her one-way ticket for a round-trip ticket, at Applicant’s 
expense, and she returned to her native country to visit her family shortly thereafter. 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
3 
 
After their daughter was born in June 2007, his wife asked Applicant to finance another 
trip to her native country to introduce their daughter to her family, and he complied. (Tr. 
103-05.) 
 
Applicant purchased a home in July 2010. He testified that he had never owned a 
home, and he did not realize how expensive it was to purchase, furnish, and maintain a 
home. He purchased furniture and appliances on credit, and obtained a $30,000 
personal loan from his credit union. He recently paid off the personal loan and several 
debts not alleged in the SOR. (AX E.)  
 
Shortly after Applicant signed the contract to purchase the home, his car was 
rear-ended and “totaled.” Applicant had counted on paying off the loan on the car and 
having additional funds for furnishing the home, but he was required to buy a 
replacement car. (Tr. 108.) 
 
Applicant testified that he misplaced his federal tax forms while moving into the 
new house and failed to file his federal and state tax returns for 2010. He “never got 
back” to filing his 2010 returns. He then failed to file his federal and state tax returns for 
2011 and 2012, because he owed at least $7,000 and could not afford to pay it. (Tr. 
109-10.) He did not file federal income tax returns for 2013 and 2014 until July or 
August 2015. (Tr. 154-55.) He has not filed state tax returns since 2011. (Tr. 151.) His 
failures to timely file federal and state income tax returns are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 
1.j. 
 
Applicant’s son was born the year after he and his wife moved into their new 
home, and his wife started pressuring him to buy airline tickets so that she, their 
daughter, and the new baby could visit her family in her native country. Applicant could 
not afford to buy the tickets, and so he used his company credit card to buy three round-
trip tickets and two laptop computers for his wife to give to her family members while 
visiting. He charged a total of about $7,000 to the credit card. (Tr. 110-11, 156.) He 
testified that he purchased the tickets and the laptops after several months of marital 
strife and insistence by his wife that she needed to visit her family. After his wife’s trip, 
he learned that she used the two laptops as barter for a rental vehicle instead of gifts. 
(Tr. 99.)  
 
Applicant testified that he notified his supervisors within days of making the 
purchases that they would appear on the company’s credit card statement. (Tr. 158.) He 
agreed to reimburse the company by payroll deductions of $500 per month. (Tr. 98, 
156; AX C.) The company’s facility security officer (FSO) and the person responsible for 
company expense accounts testified that Applicant voluntarily disclosed his 
unauthorized purchases, identified each of the unauthorized transactions, and repaid 
the unauthorized purchases in full by payroll deduction, plus a 30.75% penalty for 
personal use of the card. (Tr. 29-34, 48-52.) He made the agreed payments from May 
2012 to July 2013, totaling $7,658. (AX C.) Applicant’s misuse of the company credit 
card is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 2.a. 
 
4 
 
Applicant testified that he has never sought or received financial counseling. He 
conceded that he might benefit from counseling. (Tr. 162-63.) He does not have a 
budget, but he tracks his income and expenses on a spreadsheet. (AX A; AX B.) His 
wife had a daughter from an extramarital affair in October 2015. The child lives with 
them, and they incur expenses for child care. Applicant is not legally obligated to 
support her child, but the biological father does not pay child support. (Tr. 118.)  
 
Applicant is still driving the car he purchased in 2010 to replace the one that was 
totaled, but he recently purchased a new car, a 2015 model purchased in 2016, for 
which he is making monthly payments of $850. (Tr. 128.) He testified that he is making 
the payments on the new car every month, but “maybe not exactly on the due date.” (Tr. 
130.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he and his wife have not been intimate since she became 
pregnant with their son. They live in the same house, but his wife lives upstairs and he 
lives in the basement. He described their relationship as “roommates in the same 
house.” His wife recently found part-time employment and her net monthly pay is about 
$800. (Tr. 120.) He testified that he is contemplating divorce, but he cannot pursue it 
until he can afford to pay child support. (Tr. 119-21.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) for March 2014 and March 2015 
establish the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h. (GX 3; GX 4.) The status of these debts 
is set out below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, credit-card account referred for collection in July 2014 for 
$3,834. Applicant testified that he fell behind on the payments on this account around 
March 2011. His bank records reflect five $259 payments and one $531 payment during 
July through October 2013. (AX H; AX I.) He has not made any payments or had any 
contact with the creditor or the collection agency since the debt was referred for 
collection. (Tr. 139.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, credit-card account referred for collection in April 2012 for 
$3,593. Applicant testified that he had been making regular payments of $200 and 
expected to pay off the debt in three or four months. (Tr. 140.) His bank records reflect 
two payments of $300 and $220 in December 2013, a $130 payment in January 2014, 
monthly $100 payments from February to July 2014, monthly $275 payments from 
August 2014 to July 2015, and monthly $200 payments from August 2015 to May 2016. 
(AX G.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, installment purchase of electronics and appliances referred for 
collection in November 2013 for $2,897. Applicant has not contacted the creditor or 
made any payments on this debt. (Tr. 141.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, collection account opened in October 2013 for $52. Applicant 
testified that this debt was paid, but he provided no documentation of payment. (Tr. 
144.)  
5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, state tax liens. A state tax lien for $1,912 was filed against 
him in January 2014. A second state tax lien for $13,349 was filed against him in 
February 2014 (GX 3 at 4.) Applicant has not contacted the state tax authority, and the 
liens are unresolved. (Tr. 145-48.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g, cell phone account referred for collection in November 2012 for 
$664. Applicant testified that this account was for a cell phone that he provided to his 
wife. She lost it or gave it away, and he stopped making the payments. The account 
was only in his name. He has not resolved the debt. (Tr. 148-49.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h, delinquent state and federal taxes for tax years 2011 and 2012. 
Applicant has a payment agreement with the IRS. He paid $120 per month from 
September 2015 to March 2016.  He increased his payments to $800 per month in April 
2016, after he paid off the $30,000 signature loan from his credit union. He owes the 
IRS about $13,233. (Tr. 112; AX D.) He has taken no action to resolve his delinquent 
state taxes. 
 
Applicant’s FSO testified that, notwithstanding the misuse of the company credit 
card, Applicant is a person of sound character and judgment who would put the 
protection of the United States ahead of anything else in his life. (Tr. 46.) The FSO was 
not familiar with the SOR. After reviewing it at the hearing, he testified that it caused him 
to question Applicant’s ability to manage his finances. (Tr. 56.) 
 
 A close friend who has known Applicant and his family since childhood testified 
for Applicant. The witness and Applicant’s father were Navy shipmates and personal 
friends, who frequently visited each other’s homes. After Applicant retired from the 
Navy, they were co-workers employed by defense contractors. The witness testified that 
Applicant was not financially extravagant, did not abuse alcohol, and always behaved 
appropriately. The witness considered Applicant’s current marriage to be “rocky.” He 
considers Applicant trustworthy, reliable, and loyal. (Tr. 65-94.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
6 
 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and CBRs establish the following disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
AG ¶ 19(d): deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust;  
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and were 
not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s loss of a car that was almost paid 
for in 2010 was a condition beyond his control. However, his misuse of a company 
credit card was a voluntary act, not due to conditions beyond his control. His financial 
and tax problems are largely due to overspending, financial mismanagement, and 
yielding to pressure from his wife.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not received financial counseling, 
and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c-1.g, and 1.j. It is established for 
the credit-card debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, the federal income tax debt in SOR ¶ 1.h, and the 
failure to timely file federal income tax returns alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i.  
 
 Applicant’s payment of the credit card debt has not mitigated the underlying 
breach of trust that led him to misuse the credit card. A security clearance adjudication 
is not a debt-collection procedure. It is an evaluation of a person’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness.  See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) 
Applicant’s misuse of the credit card in response to financial pressure illustrates the 
concern underlying Guideline F and casts doubt on his current reliability and 
trustworthiness.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed the debts alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
9 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s misuse of his company credit card is cross-alleged under this 
Guideline. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” 
 
 Applicant’s conduct establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
10 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s misconduct was not minor, because it 
was a substantial breach of trust and involved a significant amount of money. It did not 
happen under unique circumstances. It was a single, isolated incident that occurred 
more than four years ago and has not recurred. However, when his misuse of the credit 
card is considered in the context of a long history of financial irresponsibility, it raises 
doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 AG 17(d) is partially established. Applicant has acknowledged his behavior and is 
remorseful. However, he has not obtained counseling, and he is still married and living 
in the same household with his wife. The extent to which she may still adversely 
influence his financial judgment is unclear. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established. Applicant reported his behavior shortly after it 
occurred. He was candid and open with his supervisor and throughout the security 
clearance process, including the hearing. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Navy for more than 24 years. He served 
with distinction in positions of significant responsibility. He rose to the second highest 
enlisted rate in the Navy. He has worked for federal contractors for almost 14 years. He 
11 
 
has held security clearances throughout his military and civilian careers. His supervisors 
have vouched for his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant yielded to marital pressure to violate his employer’s 
trust my misusing his company credit card. He spent money on airline tickets for his wife 
rather than paying his debts. His inability to manage his personal finances, repeated 
failures to timely file federal and state income tax returns, and his misuse of his 
employer’s credit card raise doubts about his current reliability and good judgment that 
have not been mitigated. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h (federal tax debt):  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h (state tax debt):  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
