 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
               
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01187 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 19, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On August 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether her clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
On September 17, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On February 29, 
2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 9, 2016, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On April 1, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for April 19, 2016. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did 
not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
received into evidence without objection. On April 26, 2016, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript. I held the record open until May 6, 2016; however, the Applicant did 
not submit any additional evidence.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.m. Without objection from the 
Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 7-8) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old program analyst employed by a defense contractor 
since July 2012. She seeks a secret security clearance to enhance her position within 
her company. (GE 1; Tr. 12-14)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2004. She was awarded a 
bachelor of science degree in December 2015. (GE 1; Tr. 14-15) Applicant has never 
married and has a seven-year-old son. Applicant was awarded $422 in monthly child 
support from her son’s father; however, she described that support as “sporadic.” 
Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 15-17) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists 12 debts totaling $27,677. The majority of these debts 
stem from student loans. Her debts were established through record evidence. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a – 1.l; GE 1 – 5; AE A - C)  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when she became pregnant in 2008. Her 
employment at the time did not provide health care insurance, and as a result she was 
 
3 
 
 
responsible for her pregnancy-related medical expenses. She moved in with her 
parents during her pregnancy and stayed with them for a short time after her son was 
born. Applicant was unemployed from April 2009 to November 2009. Applicant’s 
financial difficulties continued as a single parent. She struggled to make ends meet 
working minimum wage jobs while pursuing her undergraduate degree and took out 
payday loans to survive. All but one of her SOR debts are pay day loans or student 
loans. (GE 1; Tr. 17-23, 37-39) 
 
To address her debts, Applicant contacted a bankruptcy attorney and filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2015. However, the following month in October 
2015, Applicant filed a petition to convert her Chapter 13 bankruptcy to a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. In her petition to amend, Applicant reaffirmed the loan on her 2015 Toyota 
Camry. In December 2015, Applicant’s Chapter 7 petition was approved and she was 
awarded a discharge. Her Summary of Schedules lists $70,094 in liabilities. All of the 
SOR debts apart from her student loans were discharged in her bankruptcy. Applicant 
completed the required financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. (GE 5; 
AE A – AE C; Tr. 23-24, 33-34, 37, 39-47) 
 
When Applicant answered her SOR in September 2015, her student loans were 
in deferment. Before her hearing, Applicant consolidated her student loans and began 
making $50 monthly payments on those loans. (SOR answer; Tr. 24-31, 34-36) 
 
Applicant’s annual income is “about $40,000 a year” and she nets “1,000 to 
$1,200” every two weeks on pay day. (Tr. 27-28) She estimates her net monthly 
remainder is “about $400.” (Tr. 33) Applicant is in the process of regaining financial 
responsibility since her Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. She has about $300 in her 
savings account and “a little over $3,000” in her 401(k) retirement account. She has 
no new debt has no plans to incur any additional debt. (Tr. 47-48) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
4 
 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
are established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. Further 
inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. Applicant’s finances were adversely affected 
by her unemployment and underemployment, which are conditions largely beyond her 
control. She acted responsibly under the circumstances when she sought counsel 
from a bankruptcy attorney and all of her delinquent nonpriority, unsecured debts were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.1 Applicant is repaying her 
                                                          
1
In a bankruptcy filing, most debtors list potential creditors, even when the debt may have been 
resold or transferred to a different collection agent or creditor, to ensure notice, and reduce the risk of 
subsequent dismissal of the bankruptcy. If Applicant failed to list some nonpriority unsecured debts on 
his bankruptcy schedule, this failure to list such debts does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, in a 
no-asset bankruptcy, all unsecured, nonpriority debts are discharged when the bankruptcy court grants 
a discharge, even when they are not listed on a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 
 
6 
 
 
student loans as agreed and is current on her car loan, a debt she reaffirmed. At 
Applicant’s hearing, it was evident that she takes this process seriously. She struggled 
as a single parent, working part-time in low-paying jobs, while earning her 
undergraduate degree. Her son’s father is not forthcoming with child support leaving 
Applicant with the responsibility of shoring up any deficiency. Since Applicant began 
her current employment and was granted a bankruptcy discharge, she has been 
making inroads towards regaining financial responsibility.    
 
 Applicant received financial counseling and generated a budget as part of the 
bankruptcy process. Her negative financial situation “occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [Applicant’s] 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” under AG ¶ 20(a). She “acted 
responsibly under the circumstances,” and “the problem is being resolved or is under 
control” as required under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c). Applicant disputed the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.m, which was withdrawn by Department Counsel, and receives credit under AG ¶ 
20(e) as it pertains to this debt.      
  
 In sum, Appellant has mitigated all of the delinquent debts listed on her SOR. 
She has not generated any new delinquent debts after December 2015, when her 
nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code. Applicant continues to pay her student loans as agreed. Her resolution of her 
delinquent debts through the bankruptcy process as well as repaying her student 
loans and car loan shows sufficient effort, good judgment, trustworthiness, and 
reliability to warrant mitigation of financial considerations concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the whole-person concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
114 (3d Cir. 1996); Francis v. Nat’l Revenue Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr. S.D. FL 2010), but see 
First Circuit Bucks Majority on Discharge of Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, American Bankruptcy 
Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 (Nov. 2009). There is no requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to discharge the 
debt. Collier on Bankruptcy, Matthey Bender & Company, Inc., 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a)(3)(A). 
Some categories of priority obligations are listed on bankruptcy schedules, but are not discharged by 
bankruptcy, such as tax debts, student loan debts, and child support obligations. 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is more substantial than the 
reasons for denying her clearance. Appellant is a 31-year-old program analyst working 
for a defense contractor since July 2012. She got off to a rough start in life, but is 
doing her best to recover. Applicant is a responsible single parent raising her seven-
year-old son with little support from her son’s father. There is no evidence of any 
security violations, abuse of alcohol, use of illegal drugs, or reportable criminal 
offenses.  
  
 Appellant acted responsibly under the circumstances when all of her delinquent 
nonpriority, unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code. She has received a fresh financial start. She is motivated to continue her career 
as a defense contractor. She understands that she needs to pay her debts, and the 
conduct required to retain her security clearance. Her efforts at debt resolution have 
established a “meaningful track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident she will 
continue to resolve her student loans on her SOR and maintain her financial 
responsibility.2    
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
  
                                                          
2
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through 
credit reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar 
the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to 
reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct 
having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). An 
administrative judge does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 
2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, 
“The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow 
her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works on her financial problems.”). This 
footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:  Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
