   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-02474 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) includes three allegations of delinquent 
debts, including a $17,058 debt owed to the Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
(DFAS). The DFAS debt has been delinquent for more than 10 years, and he decided 
not to make further attempts to resolve the DFAS debt. He did not show enough 
progress paying or resolving his DFAS debt to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. Access to classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On December 19, 2012, Applicant completed and signed his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions or security clearance application (SCA). (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
   
 
2 
 
 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 3) Specifically, 
the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
On December 2, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 8, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On May 24, 2016, the case was assigned 
to me. On June 7, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, setting the hearing for June 30, 2016. (HE 1) After a brief hearing, 
Applicant’s request for a delay was granted. On June 30, 2016, DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing, setting the hearing for July 25, 2016. (HE 2) The second hearing started 
from the beginning without consideration of the prior hearing. (Tr. 11-12) His hearing 
was held as scheduled on July 25, 2016.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; and all exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 17-20; Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1-4; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-B) On July 11, 2016, and August 2, 2016, 
DOHA received a copy of the first and second transcript of the hearings.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. 
He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. He also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old security lieutenant, who has worked for his employer 
for five years. (Tr. 6, 23; GE 1) He also holds part-time employment as a security officer. 
(Tr. 23) His total annual income from both jobs is $95,000. (Tr. 24) In 1991, he 
graduated from high school. (Tr. 7) He served in the Marine Corps from 1992 to 1996, 
and from 1998 to 2001. (Tr. 7) He was honorably discharged as a sergeant. (Tr. 7) His 
final Marine Corps specialty was maintenance administrator. (Tr. 8) In 1995, he married, 
and in 2002, he divorced. (Tr. 9) His children are ages 16 and 21. (Tr. 10) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports and the SOR allege three delinquent debts totaling 
$19,244. The status of his three SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $1,479 debt resulting from an on-line education account. 
(Tr. 26-27) The debt has been owed for more than two years. (Tr. 28) Applicant said he 
paid $50 monthly for the three months before his hearing to the creditor. (Tr. 26-27) He 
believes the debt is reduced to $1,300. (Tr. 27) He said he did not have any 
documentation showing his payments. (Tr. 28) He plans to pay the debt by October 
2016. (Tr. 30) 
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
   
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a debt owed to DFAS for $17,058. Applicant said he did not 
understand why he owed this debt to DFAS. In November 1999, Applicant, who was on 
active duty in the Marine Corps, moved from his off-post residence into family quarters 
on post with his spouse, who was also on active duty. (Tr. 30-31, 47-48) In the summer 
of 2000, Applicant moved from his spouse’s family quarters to the barracks. (Tr. 31, 48) 
At that time, Applicant was a corporal, and his spouse was a sergeant. (Tr. 32) His 
spouse had custody of their child. (Tr. 32) Applicant was unsure about when his spouse 
moved out of family quarters; however, he believed it was in 2001. (Tr. 32, 48) Applicant 
was discharged from the Marine Corps in November 2001. (Tr. 50) Applicant was fairly 
sure that he was not receiving a housing allowance while he was living in the barracks. 
(Tr. 33-34, 49)  
 
When Applicant left the Marine Corps, he received separation pay of $9,000 after 
taxes. (Tr. 50) He has known about the DFAS debt for about 10 years. (Tr. 35) 
Applicant made several telephone calls to try to learn more about this DFAS debt, and 
he sent a letter to DFAS about five years ago. (Tr. 35-39) His most recent telephone call 
to DFAS was more than a year ago. (Tr. 40) DFAS advised him he owed $17,000; 
however, DFAS did not provide substantiating documentation to establish the debt. (Tr. 
38) He has no documentation showing his contacts with DFAS to resolve the debt. (Tr. 
36) He believed the debt was in his former spouse’s name because she was a 
sergeant, and he was a corporal. (Tr. 39) She was still in the Marine Corps when 
Applicant was discharged. (Tr. 39) He contended he was not responsible for the debt. 
(Tr. 39) Applicant provided a July 11, 2016 letter from Equifax indicating the DFAS debt 
was deleted from his Equifax Credit Report. (AE A) He said he contacted the credit 
reporting companies and disputed the debt. (Tr. 41) He did not intend to take any further 
action to address the DFAS debt, and he considered the matter closed. (Tr. 42) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a child support delinquency of $707. (Tr. 42) Applicant said his 
child support debt was current. (Tr. 42) He said the debt did not appear on his current 
credit report. (Tr. 42) He pays $66 monthly to address the debt. (Tr. 43) He did not 
provide documentary proof of any payments. (Tr. 43)  
 
Applicant requested an extension to file his 2015 federal income tax return, and 
he believes he will not need to file his tax return until April 2017. (Tr. 44) He is disputing 
with his former spouse the deduction for his child on their federal income tax returns. 
(Tr. 44) He has not filed his 2015 state tax return. (Tr. 45) He has not received credit 
counseling. (Tr. 45) He does not use a written budget. (Tr. 46) Applicant contributes to 
his community. He supports a youth basketball team. (Tr. 56)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
   
 
4 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
  
   
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. The evidence of 
record establishes a history of three delinquent debts totaling $19,244. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
   
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant presented some mitigating information. Applicant said he was making 
payments on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. I have credited him with mitigating these 
two debts. This positive information does not fully mitigate his failure to resolve or 
provide documentation showing a good-faith attempt to resolve his DFAS debt for 
$17,058. The DOHA Appeal Board has repeatedly emphasized the importance of timely 
payment of U.S. Government debts. See ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 
15, 2016) (stating “A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations 
does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those 
granted access to classified information”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 14-05476 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 
2002)); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015).  
 
Applicant is not credited with mitigating the DFAS debt because he did not 
provide any documentation showing any progress paying the debt or a reasonable 
dispute of the debt, such as copies of letters to DFAS disputing his responsibility for the 
debt. The record does not indicate why DFAS believes Applicant received an 
overpayment. He may have received an overpayment of housing allowance while he 
                                                                                                                                            
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
   
 
7 
 
 
was living in the barracks or quarters; he may not have been entitled to separation pay; 
or there could be some other reason for the overpayment. Applicant admitted that he 
contacted DFAS, and a DFAS representative told him on the telephone that he owed 
the debt. If Applicant wanted to contest the debt, it was his responsibility to write DFAS 
and ask for the basis of the debt, and, if necessary, to ask for an audit of his pay and 
supporting documentation to ensure the validity of the debt.3 He is not required to pay a 
debt that is not valid; however, he is required to act responsibly in determining the 
validity of a debt, and, then he is responsible for paying his valid debts.    
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his DFAS debt. He did not provide “a reasonable basis 
to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem;” he did 
not provide “documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute;” and he did not 
provide “evidence of actions to resolve the issue” under AG ¶ 20(e). There is insufficient 
assurance that his DFAS debt is being resolved. Under all the circumstances, he failed 
to establish that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old security lieutenant, who has worked for his employer 
for five years. He also holds part-time employment as a security officer. His total annual 
income from both jobs is $95,000. He served in the Marine Corps from 1992 to 1996, 
                                            
3See Defense Finance and Accounting Service website, Military Debts, http://www.dfas.mil/ 
debtandclaims/militarydebts.html. Additional information and contact numbers are at http://www.dfas.mil.  
   
 
8 
 
 
and from 1998 to 2001. He was honorably discharged as a sergeant. There is no 
evidence of security violations. 
 
Applicant is credited with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He said he 
has established payment plans and is on track to resolve these two debts. He is not 
credited with mitigating his $17,058 DFAS debt. The debt has been delinquent for more 
than 10 years, and in Applicant’s most recent communication with DFAS, he learned 
that DFAS believes the debt is valid. He did not follow-up with a written dispute to 
DFAS; he did not make a written request for an audit; and he did not make payments to 
DFAS. His failure to make greater progress resolving his DFAS debt shows lack of 
financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. 
More documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of his past-due debt, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. It is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
  
   
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
