 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00244 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. On June 17, 2016, Department Counsel 
amended the SOR. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 18, 2015, and the amended SOR on 
June 21, 2016. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on May 2, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
 
2 
 
 
issued a notice of hearing on June 2, 2016.1 I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
June 21, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted into evidence without objection.2 The record was held 
open until July 5, 2016, to permit Applicant to submit additional documents. None were 
received, and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 
2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.l. Her motion 
was granted. She additionally moved to add a new allegation, SOR ¶ 1.o, to read as 
follows:  
 
“You are indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent income taxes 
in the approximate amount of $30,000 owed for tax years 2007 through 
2009, and that as of the date of the Statement of Reasons, the amount 
remains unpaid.”  
 
There was no objection and the motion was granted.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, 1.m, and 1.n. 
He denied the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He holds an associate’s degree earned in 2006. He 
served in the Navy from 1982 to 2004 and retired honorably in the paygrade E-7. He 
was married from 1986 to 2004, and has two adult children from the marriage, ages 26 
and 23. He remarried in 2004 and divorced in 2010. There are no children from the 
marriage. Applicant has been steadily employed since at least 2008. When he retired 
from the Navy, his first wife was entitled to 30% of his retirement pay. After that 
deduction, he receives $1,200 of retirement pay.4  
 
Applicant testified that he was unemployed from November 2006 to January 
2007. He was working and living paycheck to paycheck. He moved to another state to 
                                                          
1 Tr. 10-13. Applicant was advised he had the right to 15 days notice regarding the additional SOR 
allegations. He was also advised that if he elected to proceed with the hearing, I would leave the record 
open to allow him time to submit documents to support his case. He waived his right and elected to 
proceed with the hearing.  
 
2 Hearing Exhibit I is a copy of Department Counsel’s discovery letter that was provided to Applicant. 
 
3 Tr. 60-61, 84. 
 
4 Tr. 21-25. 
 
3 
 
 
take a job, but his wife stayed behind to finish her master’s degree. He was providing 
her support while they lived separately. His wife filed for a separation agreement in 
September 2008. They divorced in June 2010. Applicant provided a copy of his divorce 
decree. It notes that there was a property settlement agreement from September 2008 
that required Applicant to pay his wife spousal maintenance because she was unable to 
support herself or “meet the current debt obligations that were acquired during and for 
the marriage, which were obtained in her name and under her credit.”5 The divorce 
decree ratified the property settlement agreement, which required Applicant to pay 
spousal support of $1,700 per month for 60 months. Payments were taxable income to 
the spouse and tax deductible as permitted for Applicant. The decree advised Applicant 
if he failed to make the timely payments, then his wages could be garnished. Applicant 
was also required to make the monthly payments on his spouse’s car loan until it was 
satisfied in November 2012, and the car insurance associated with the vehicle. He was 
required to arrange those payments by direct deposit or allotment. He testified he paid 
his wife the support, but was unable to make deposit payment arrangements. 
Applicant’s wages were garnished in December 2011 to pay his spousal support. 
Applicant testified that his spouse lied about receiving her payments, so the 
garnishment was executed. The divorce decree does not address allocation of martial 
debts. Applicant testified that at the time he “just wanted out of it.”6 In July 2015, 
Applicant’s spousal support obligations were completed. He estimated his current 
annual income with his military retirement pay is about $90,000.7  
 
Applicant testified that from 2007 through 2009 he permitted his wife to file their 
federal income tax returns. They were not living together and were formally separated 
after September 2008. He stated he learned in 2011 that she did not file their tax returns 
jointly, and he owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) approximately $30,000. He was 
contacted by the IRS in 2011 about his delinquent tax returns. He stated he tried to 
resolve the tax issues with the IRS, but could not, so he stopped communicating with 
them. In February 2016, the IRS began garnishing $400 from his pay for the back 
taxes.8  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from January 2016, 
December 2014, and July 2012.9 
 
 Applicant has numerous other delinquent debts. He testified that he was working 
his way out of debt in 2004 after his first divorce. He had custody of the children at the 
time and his first wife was required to pay him child support. He attended school from 
2003 to 2006 and obtained student loans. Because he failed a class, he was required to 
                                                          
5 AE A, B. 
 
6 Tr. 74.  
 
7 Tr. 32-36, 50-52, 74-77; AE A, B. 
 
8 Tr. 54-58, 78-81. 
 
9 GE 3, 4, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
pay the loans immediately, and his grants were cancelled. Applicant testified that 
payments on the student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, $9,620; and 1.k, $7,429) were due around 
2007. He said he made $100 payments for six or seven months and then stopped 
because he did not have enough money. He was contacted by the creditors of his 
student loans in February 2016 and agreed to participate in a rehabilitation program. He 
agreed to pay $97 a month for nine months and then a new monthly payment will be 
negotiated. Applicant provided a copy of the rehabilitation agreement he signed in 
February 2016. He testified that he made the payments from March through June 2016, 
but did not provide documentary proof.10 
 
In August 2012, as part of Applicant’s background investigation, he was 
interviewed by a government investigator. Applicant was specifically confronted with the 
delinquent debts that are alleged in the SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, and 
1.m. He told the investigator he was unaware of any of these delinquent debts. He was 
also confronted with his delinquent student loans. He indicated that his student loans 
were deferred, and he was unaware of the balance owed. He indicated that he was 
working with the creditor to rehabilitate the loans. He told the investigator that he did not 
list the student loans on his security clearance application (SCA) because he received 
the past-due notice after he completed the SCA. With regard to the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR that were brought to Applicant’s attention by the investigator, 
Applicant indicated his future plans were to research the debts, determine if they were 
valid, and take care of them if he owed the debt.11 
 
 Applicant has not contacted the creditors for the debts in SOR ¶ 1.b ($4,313, 
repossessed vehicle); ¶ 1.d ($460, internet service); ¶ 1.e ($216, utilities); ¶ 1.g ($404, 
collection account); ¶ 1.h ($641, credit card); ¶ 1.i ($225, owed to town); ¶ 1.j ($135, 
insurance); and ¶ 1.m ($842, college). The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($1,077) is for medical 
services provided in 2013. Applicant failed to submit a timely claim, and then it was too 
old and the insurer would not pay. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($638) is a cable bill that 
Applicant disputed, but never resolved. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is a judgment for a credit 
card ($10,190) that is not resolved.12  
 
 Applicant told the investigator in August 2012 that he was contacted by creditors 
and collection agencies about his delinquent debts. He stated he was unfamiliar with the 
accounts they were calling about so he did not follow up. He subsequently stopped 
answering the telephone when they called.13  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 26-32, 37-41, 66-68; AE C. 
 
11 Tr. 36, 68-72; GE 2. I have not considered this information for disqualifying purposes, but will consider 
it when analyzing his credibility, in mitigation, and the “whole person.” 
 
12 Tr. 41-50, 59-66. 
 
13 GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant participated in financial counseling in 2006. He does not have a written 
budget. He stated he did not have the money to pay his delinquent debts because he 
was paying his second wife spousal support. That support ended in July 2015. He did 
not pay his delinquent debts after his spousal support ended.14  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
14 Tr. 81-82. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to obtain money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.15 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent student loans, federal income taxes, an unsatisfied 
judgment, and numerous delinquent debts from at least 2007, which he has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of Applicant’s delinquent debts are resolved. He was made aware of most 
of the debts alleged in the SOR during his 2012 background interview. He did not 
contact the creditors. He did not address his delinquent student loans until the creditor 
contacted him in February 2016. He was notified in 2011 that he had a federal income 
tax debt. Applicant stopped communicating with the IRS, and in 2016 it began 
garnishing his wages. His spousal support obligation terminated in July 2015. He did not 
take action to resolve his debts after he had additional resources. Applicant’s conduct 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 For the application of AG ¶ 20(b), there must be conditions that were beyond 
Applicant’s control that resulted in the financial hardship, and he must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant attributed his financial problems to his 
divorces and spousal support obligation. This was somewhat beyond his control. 
Applicant was confronted with and made aware of his delinquent debts during his 
background interview in 2012. In 2016, the student loan creditors contacted him to 
arrange a rehabilitation payment plan. Despite being contacted by the IRS in 2011, he 
failed to arrange a payment plan, and in 2016 the IRS began garnishing his wages for 
back taxes. Even after the spousal support ended and presumably he had more money, 
he ignored his delinquent debts. Applicant did not address any of the other delinquent 
debts. Applicant has not acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant testified that he received financial counseling ten years ago in 2006. 
There are not clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) minimally applies. Applicant has not made good-faith efforts to 
resolve his debts. Applicant did not voluntarily address his delinquent student loans or 
 
8 
 
 
his unpaid taxes. Rather, he was contacted by the student loan creditors who offered 
him the opportunity to rehabilitate his delinquent loans with monthly payments. He did 
not provide proof that he has made those payments. Applicant was also contacted by 
the IRS, but then he stopped communicating with them, and his wages were garnished. 
I find that he has not initiated good-faith efforts to repay his overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant testified that he disputed the cable debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, but failed to 
provide proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 54 years old and a military veteran. After his divorce he had limited 
resources to pay his bills. However, he has also ignored his delinquent debts despite 
being on notice since 2012 that they were a security concern. Although the spousal 
support he was required to pay affected his ability to fully address all of his delinquent 
debts, he has not voluntarily addressed any of them since the support ended. 
Applicant’s conduct raises serious questions about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations guideline security 
concerns.  
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.l:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
