 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01493 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that she has a track record of financial 
responsibility and that her financial problems are under control. She failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 8, 2014. After 
reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On September 13, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on October 8 and 
on November 17, 2015, and requested a decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 28, 
2015, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated December 29, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 4, 2016. She was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
concerns. Applicant timely submitted additional evidence with her response to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on August 3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, she admitted all the SOR factual allegations, but 
challenged the total owed on the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. She also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s SOR and FORM admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old program analyst employed by a federal contractor. She 
graduated from high school in 1985, and has completed some college work-related 
training courses. Applicant has never been married, but she has been living with a 
cohabitant since January 2012. She has twins (a boy and a girl) born in 2012.  
 
During a June 2014 interview with a Government investigator, Applicant stated that 
she has held security clearances from different Government agencies since 1988. 
Applicant’s 2014 SCA shows that she has worked for federal contractors since 2000 to 
present. She was hired by her current employer, a federal contractor, in November 2011. 
Her continued employment is contingent on her retaining her clearance eligibility. There 
are no allegations or evidence of any rule or security violations.   
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s May 2014 SCA asked her to disclose 
whether in the past seven years she had: filed a bankruptcy petition; failed to file or pay 
her federal and state taxes; any financial problems, including delinquent or in-collection 
debts; loan defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled; had 
judgments filed against her; and whether she was currently over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt, or had been over 120 days delinquent on any debts during the last seven years. 
Applicant answered “no” and failed to disclose the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the 13 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, 
her FORM response, and the credit reports establish all the debts in the SOR.  
 
In August 2003, Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator 
concerning her financial problems and her 2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. 
Applicant explained that she did not handle investments properly. Additionally, she was 
laid off from her job during a period of four months and she was not able to meet her 
financial obligations and pay her living expenses. Her accounts became delinquent and 
she was forced to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. In her 2003 sworn statement 
Applicant indicated: “As of today, I have established a good credit history and will continue 
to do so. I have learned a very valuable lesson from my previous financial mistakes and 
it is a lesson well leaned and will not be repeated.” 
 
During Applicant’s June 2014 interview, she “volunteered” that she had a judgment 
and numerous delinquent accounts that she had failed to disclose in her May 2014 SCA. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant was confronted with the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. She explained 
that many of the accounts became delinquent because she developed financial problems 
as a result of her pregnancy during 2011 to 2012.  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant implied that she had to file for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection in 2000, because of a relationship breakup. Concerning her current 
financial problems, Applicant explained that between April 2007 and November 2011, her 
annual salary was $98,000. In August 2011, her employer lost the contract and she was 
hired by the new contractor at an annual salary of $83,000, with a resulting cut in pay of 
$15,000. Applicant further explained that she was going through a very difficult time trying 
to make her monthly payments. Applicant claimed that she was making some payments 
to her creditors and had reduced her debt. She stated that she was fully aware of her 
financial responsibilities, and promised to continue paying her debt to the best of her 
ability. 
 
In her FORM response, Applicant claimed that she had made some payments and 
reduced her debt in SOR ¶ 1.g (alleging a past-due consumer charge account in the 
approximate amount of $230, and owing a total of $415) and SOR ¶ 1.h (alleging a past-
due consumer charge account in the approximate amount of $184, and owing a total of 
$402). Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g 
has a balance of $225, which is past due. And, the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h has a 
balance of $97, which is past due. 
 
Applicant presented little evidence to show that she has been in contact with her 
creditors, or that she has attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve her delinquent 
debts since they became delinquent. I note, however, that the FORM credit reports 
(submitted by the Government) show that Applicant has paid some accounts and has 
other accounts in good standing not alleged in the SOR.  
 
Other than her current salary, Applicant provided no information about her current 
financial position. She did not provide any information about her monthly expenses, and 
whether her current income is sufficient to pay her current living expenses and debts. 
There is no information to indicate whether she recently participated in financial 
counseling or whether she follows a budget.  
 
Applicant is considered to be a valuable employee. Applicant’s program manager, 
a retired Navy commander, lauded her professional and personal integrity, her aggressive 
work ethic, and her customer loyalty. Applicant made her program manager aware of her 
financial problems. He confirmed Applicant’s salary reduction resulting from the change 
in employers. Applicant’s program manager believes Applicant poses no security risk, 
and recommends the continuation of her security clearance.  
 
  
 
4 
                                         
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in her credit reports, SOR 
response, and her FORM response. The evidence establishes the 13 delinquent accounts 
alleged in the SOR, totaling about $10,000, and her 2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
discharge.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
 
6 
                                         
 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems were recent, frequent, and she presented insufficient evidence to show 
that her financial problems are under control, and that her debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond her control 
– in 1999, the breakup of her relationship and her six-month period of unemployment. In 
2011, her annual income was reduced by $15,000 when her employer lost the contract. 
Notwithstanding, she presented little evidence to show what efforts she took since 2011 
to remain in contact with her creditors, or what efforts she has taken to pay or resolve her 
delinquent debts. Applicant presented no documentary evidence of payment agreements 
or payments made on any of the debts alleged in the SOR, except with respect to SOR 
¶¶ 1.g and 1.h.  
 
Applicant has possessed a security clearance since 1988. Her financial problems 
date back to before 2009. She knew about the Government’s concerns about her financial 
problems because she was questioned in 2003 by Government investigators concerning 
her 1999-2000 bankruptcy. Additionally, she was fully aware that she was required to be 
financially responsible to be eligible for a clearance. Her evidence is insufficient to show 
that she contacted her creditors or made any payments on her delinquent accounts 
(except for SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h). Applicant’s yearly income was reduced by $15,000, but 
she was still making about $83,000 a year. She presented little evidence of efforts to 
address her delinquent accounts. Nor did she present evidence of lifestyle changes, a 
working budget, or that she sought financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant submitted her SCA in 2014, and disclosed no financial problems or 
delinquent debts. She was questioned about her financial problems during a 2014 
interview. She was issued the SOR September 2015, and was again made aware of the 
Government’s security concerns about her financial problems. Applicant was allowed a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to produce evidence in extenuation and 
mitigation; however, she failed to provide a reasonable explanation for her failure to 
address her delinquent debts since she acquired them. 
 
Applicant also failed to establish that she has sufficient income to keep her debts 
in current status and to continue making progress paying her delinquent debts. She also 
claimed to understand that she is required to maintain financial responsibility to remain 
 
7 
                                         
 
eligible for a security clearance. Based on Applicant’s failure to address her debts, her 
promise to pay her delinquent debts is not credible.  
 
 In sum, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). She presented insufficient 
evidence to show that she initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve her debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old program analyst employed with a federal contractor. She 
has worked for federal contractors since 1988, and has held a security clearance during 
most of her employment. Applicant is considered to be an honest, trustworthy, 
responsible, professional, and valuable employee. During her years working with federal 
contractors she had no security issues or violations.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in part, by circumstances beyond her 
control – the breakup of her relationship, a six-month period of unemployment, and a 
$15,000 cut in pay in 2011. Applicant promised to pay or resolve the unpaid SOR debts. 
She understands that she needs to pay her debts, and that she is required to demonstrate 
financial responsibility to retain her security clearance and her job.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant submitted little evidence of payments to the SOR 
creditors or of efforts to resolve her debts. There is insufficient evidence of progress 
addressing Applicant’s financial problems. The available information is insufficient to 
establish clear indications that she does not have a current financial problem, or that her 
financial problems are being resolved, or are under control. Applicant failed to establish 
that she has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant 
or reinstatement of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This 
decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not 
attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in the 
future. With more effort towards resolving his past-due debts, and a track record of 
behavior consistent with his obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of his worthiness for access to classified information.  
For the above stated reasons, I find that the financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
 
8 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
