                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15–04200
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
August 5, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing,
(e-QIP) on August 1, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On December 4, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD) pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The SOR sets forth the reasons why DoD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 7, 2016, and requested an
administrative hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals administrative
judge.  This case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge on April 11,
2016.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 18, 2016, and the hearing was scheduled
for June 3, 2016.  At the hearing the Government presented six exhibits, referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant
presented five exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through E which were also
2
admitted into evidence without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The
record remained open until close of business on June 17, 2016, to allow the Applicant to
submit additional documentation.  Applicant submitted no Post-Hearing Exhibits.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on June 13, 2016.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 39 years old and is divorced with five children.  He has a Master’s
degree in Information Assurance.  He holds the position of Cyber Team Member for a
defense contractor.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this
employment.   
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant denies allegation 1.a., and admits allegation 1.b, of the SOR set forth
under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit reports of Applicant
dated August 31, 2013; April 10, 2015; February 24, 2016; and June 2, 2016, reflect
that Applicant was indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the SOR, in an amount
totaling approximately $500,000.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4, 5 and 6.)      
Applicant has a history of financial responsibility up until May 2012.  Applicant is
recently divorced.  He has worked for the defense industry since 2003 and has held a
security clearance since then.  He has never had a security violation.  
In 2006, Applicant purchased a house for he and his wife and their five children.
To take care of their children, his wife, who is trained and educated as a registered
nurse, is now a homemaker and stay at home mother.  They obtained a 30 year fixed
mortgage loan when they purchased the house.  The mortgage payment was about
$3,400.  Applicant was comfortably able to make the house payments.  He also
refinanced the second mortgage to lower the payments.  In May 2012, Applicant and his
wife had twins, and the Applicant’s 70 to 80 mile commute to work became too stressful
on the family.  Applicant contacted a real estate agent to put the house up for sale, with
the intent of moving closer to his work.  (Tr. p. 37.)  Applicant had the money to continue
making the mortgage payments on the house, but was advised by his real estate agent
and his attorney to stop doing so.  At the time, Applicant owed a total of about $500,000
on both mortgages.  The lenders negotiated about a short sale for over a year.  The
short sale was not approved and on April 24, 2013, the house was foreclosed upon.
3
(Applicant’s Exhibits D and E.)  Applicant was indebted to a lender for an account that
was charged off in the amount of $363,948.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  This debt is no
longer reflected as owing on his credit report.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  He was also
indebted to a lender for a second loan on the house that was charged off in the amount
of approximately $120,980.  Applicant testified that the property was sold at auction for
about $380,000, which was more than the Applicant owed on his first loan.  Applicant
further stated that in addition, the lender requested a few thousand more dollars from
the Applicant, and he paid it.  In regard to the second loan on the house, Applicant
contacted the lender after the foreclosure and was not given any information as to what
he owed or not.  In December 2015, this matter resurfaced through the process of
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation, and Applicant once again
contacted the lender to get the matter resolved.  He is currently working toward an
agreeable settlement amount that he plans to pay with his retirement funds.
(Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
       
Applicant testified that he currently earns $130,000 annually.  He brings home
$7,600 monthly.  He rents a room for $400 that include utilities.  He pays $5,000
monthly in child support.  His car payments are $550 monthly.  Applicant has reduced
his other expenses.  He has $4,000 in his savings account and $40,000 in his
retirement account.  He has been in regular contact with the lender on the second
mortgage and plans to use his retirement account to pay the second loan on the house
once they arrive at an agreement settlement amount.  (Tr. p. 51) He has no other
delinquent accounts.  
Letters of recommendation from professional colleagues and coworkers indicate
that he is intelligent, a creative thinker, a great leader, a hard worker, dependable, a
good communicator, very courteous, and well respected.  He is recommended for a
security clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing A.)  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
  
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
4
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances; 
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
20.(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the caus of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
h. the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
5
i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct that are reasonably related to the ultimate question, posed
in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The administrative
judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have a reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in excessive financial indebtedness that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has had excessive financial indebtedness (Guideline F) and the totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence,
Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that
is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline F of the SOR.  
6
The evidence shows that Applicant has a history of financial responsibility.  It was
in May 2012, after his twins were born, that the long commute to work became too
stressful on his family.  He tried to sell the house to move closer to work.  Unable to sell
the house, his real estate agent and attorney advised his to stop making payments in
order to be considered for a short sale.  The short sale never materialized, but the
house was foreclosed upon and sold at auction, for more than what Applicant owed on
the loan.  The sale of the house relieved Applicant’s obligation under the first mortgage.
Applicant is currently working out a settlement with the lender on the second mortgage.
Applicant is also recently divorced.  He provides all of the financial support for his ex-
wife and their five children in the amount of $5,000 monthly.  He rents a room for
himself.  It cannot be said that he is not responsible.  In fact, he is very responsible. 
Under the circumstances, Applicant has acted reasonably and responsibly and
has shown good judgment.  Considering all of the evidence, Applicant has introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case. 
   In regard to Guideline F, Financial Considerations, Disqualifying Conditions
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting
financial obligations apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 20.(d) the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and
20.(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due
debt which is the caus of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate
the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue  are also
applicable.  Accordingly, I find for Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.   Applicant has worked for the defense
industry for thirteen years and has held a security clearance without incident.  When his
house was foreclosed upon, he reported it to his company.  He also self-reported an
incident when he committed a security violation, when no one else knew about it.  (Tr.
pp. 30-31.)  He is of good moral character and honesty.  He has made a good-faith
effort to resolve his debts, and has demonstrated reliability and trustworthiness.  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth above,
when viewed under all of the guidelines as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of good judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a willingness to
comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person
may properly safeguard classified information.  A security clearance is a privilege, not a
right.  In order to meet the qualifications for access to classified information, it must be
7
determined that the applicant is and has been sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in
his everyday life to adequately protect the Government’s national interest. Overall,
based upon the seriousness of the conduct outlined here, this Applicant has
demonstrated that he is sufficiently trustworthy, and does meet the eligibility
requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find for Applicant under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
     
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has overcome the Government's case
opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a
finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
