 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02421 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On October 17, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant answered the SOR on November 2, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated January 14, 2016, was provided to him by letter dated that 
same day. Applicant received the FORM on January 25, 2016. He was afforded 30 days 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
timely submitted additional information after receipt of the FORM, which was received 
without objection from Department Counsel.1 On March 31, 2016, DOHA assigned the 
case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with 
explanations except SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.u. His SOR answers are incorporated in my 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old welder, and he seeks employment as a welder with a 
defense contractor. (Items 3, 4) In conjunction with that employment he seeks a security 
clearance as a first-time applicant. He was awarded his General Education 
Development certificate in October 1980. (Item 3) Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force 
from February 1981 to March 1981 and received a medical discharge. (Item 3) He has 
never married. (Item 3) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR contains 23 separate allegations of debts totaling 
approximately $22,375 as well as an allegation of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 
September 2005. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.x; Item 1) All of his SOR debts as well as his 
bankruptcy are documented in his August 28, 2014 and February 23, 2015 credit 
reports. (Items 5, 6) 
 
In his August 20, 2014 SF-86 and October 7, 2014 Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he attributed his indebtedness to 
periods of unemployment from November 2008 to January 2009, November 2009 to 
January 2010, November 2010 to January 2011, November 2011 to January 2012, and 
September 2012 to November 2012. (Items 3, 4) 
 
Applicant listed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, a $5,224 charged-off account, in his SF-
86, and claims in both his SF-86 and SOR answer that he has been paying this debt, 
and owes approximately $4,000. However, he provided no documentation to 
corroborate his claim. (Items 2, 3) He discussed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, and 
1.n in his October 2014 OPM PSI. (Item 4) He also stated in his OPM PSI that he was 
unaware of the details surrounding his remaining debts, he stated that he intended to 
                                                          
1
Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as “FORM response.” 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
pay them. (Item 4) He reasserted a similar response in his SOR answer. (Item 2) In his 
FORM response, Applicant claimed to have paid several creditors, but did not provide 
documentation corroborating his claims and it is unclear which SOR debts, if any, have 
been sufficiently addressed. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based 
this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about 
applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has 
not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented not 
only in his credit reports, but also in the additional evidence contained in the FORM. 
The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. The available information shows 
that Applicant has taken insufficient action to resolve his delinquent debts. As noted, the 
additional information that Applicant submitted in his FORM response in its present form 
is of limited use. Department Counsel discussed the importance of submitting 
documentation in her FORM, yet Applicant declined or chose not to submit 
substantiating documentation of debt resolution or address the deficiencies that were 
pointed out to him.  
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts.3 Rather 
the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, 
the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
                                                          
2
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
3
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that [he] has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that [he] has 
established a plan to resolve [his] financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of [his] 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.4 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate financial security concerns. By failing to provide 
such information, and in relying on a limited explanation, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
 After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,5 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security 
concerns. Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:  
   
         Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.x:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
5
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
