 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03590 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 1, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on February 10, 2016, and reassigned to me on May 4, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 20, 2016, scheduling 
the hearing for June 23, 2016. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 5, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2003. He seeks to retain his security clearance. He attended 
trade school and college for a period without earning a degree. He is married with two 
minor children.1 
 
Applicant developed financial problems, which he attributed to the normal 
expenses of having a family with two children. He also admitted that he and his wife had 
poor spending habits. The SOR alleges a $9,622 judgment, four delinquent debts 
totaling about $15,070, and that Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in 
October 2015. The judgment was awarded to the creditor of the $4,358 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant admitted owing all the debts.2 
 
Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in October 2015. 
Under Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured Claims, the petition listed $122,271 in 
claims, which included a $121,509 mortgage loan and $762 owed on an auto loan. The 
petition listed $3,600 owed to the IRS and $1,600 in attorney’s fees under Schedule E, 
Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims. Applicant paid the attorney $2,000 before 
the petition was filed. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority 
Claims, the petition listed debts totaling $44,562.3  
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy plan calls for 59 monthly payments, with payments of 
$550 for months 1 to 5, followed by $718 payments for months 6 to 28, and $1,180 
payments for months 29 to 59. The total to be paid through the plan is $55,870, which 
includes 100% payments to the unsecured debts under Schedules E and F. Applicant’s 
mortgage and auto loans are being paid outside the plan. The bankruptcy payments are 
being garnished from Applicant’s paycheck. He submitted documentation that he has 
made all required payments.4 
 
Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy. He 
and his wife are on a strict budget. He credibly testified that he will make all the required 
payments until his debts are paid and the bankruptcy discharged.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-21; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16, 22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 16; GE 4; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 16, 21-22; GE 4; AE A, B. 
 
5 Tr. at 18-21, 25; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were the result of the normal expenses of having 
a family with two children and poor spending habits. He and his wife filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case in October 2015, and they have been consistently paying into the plan. 
His unsecured debts will be completely paid through the plan. His current finances are 
stable. He and his wife adhere to a strict budget. He credibly testified that he will 
continue with the bankruptcy plan until completion. Applicant has a plan to resolve his 
financial problems, and he has taken significant action to implement that plan. The 
above mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
5 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
