1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00892 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
May 11, 2012. On August 24, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference, and Guideline B, 
foreign influence.2 
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 2, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 11, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for June 2, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 13, 2016. 
  
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified3 and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, 
which were admitted without objection. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel did not request that I take administrative notice of facts 
about Sweden, however, I have taken administrative notice of the following, based on 
U.S. Government publications: 
 
A military power during the 17th century, Sweden has not participated in 
any war for two centuries. An armed neutrality was preserved in both 
world wars. Sweden's long-successful economic formula of a capitalist 
system intermixed with substantial welfare elements was challenged in the 
1990s by high unemployment and in 2000-02 and 2009 by the global 
economic downturns, but fiscal discipline over the past several years has 
allowed the country to weather economic vagaries. Sweden joined the EU 
in 1995, but the public rejected the introduction of the euro in a 2003 
referendum.4 
 
Relations between the United States and Sweden are built on a shared 
heritage that dates back to 1638. Sweden was one of the first countries to 
recognize U.S. independence in 1783 and the two countries have 
maintained a strong bilateral friendship since then, based on shared 
values and mutual interests. Sweden is an Enhanced Opportunities 
Partner (EOP) of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and plays 
an active leadership role on the international stage, from its long-term 
investment in Afghanistan to its role as a global peacemaker. Sweden is 
also a member of the Counter-ISIL Coalition and participates in the United 
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali 
(MINUSMA). Sweden’s commitment to promoting global democracy, 
                                                          
3 Applicant called two witnesses to testify at the hearing; his Facility Security Officer (FSO) and a 
supervisor/co-worker. Both witnesses testified favorably for Applicant. 
 
4 CIA World Fact Book - Sweden, at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/sw.html. 
 
3 
 
human rights, gender equality, and international development and 
sustainability makes it a respected moral leader in international affairs.5 
 
 None of the government source documents reviewed above reflect that Sweden 
engages in economic or intelligence activity directed toward the United States. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old management consultant employed by a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since 2012. He married in 2003, and 
has three children born in the United States. His spouse and children are U.S. dual 
citizens.6 He earned a Master of Business Administration in 1996.7 He received a DoD 
security clearance in 2012. 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline C that Applicant is a dual citizen of Sweden 
and exercised his foreign citizenship by possessing a valid Swedish passport and 
renewed it in 2013 after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2008. He is alleged to have renewed 
the passport after retrieving it from his facility security officer (FSO), after it was 
relinquished as a condition of being granted a security clearance. He is alleged to be 
retaining his passport for ease of travel, despite his U.S. citizenship, and to have 
traveled to Sweden in 2009 with the passport. Additionally, he is alleged to have voted 
in Swedish elections in 2009 and 2014, with intent to continue to exercise his right to 
vote with his Swedish citizenship. Under Guideline B, Applicant’s parents, aunt, uncle, 
cousins and friends are alleged to be Swedish citizens and residents, and he travels to 
Sweden approximately every year. Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations in his 
Answer, and provided some explanations. 
 
 Applicant was born in 1969 in Sweden, to Swedish parents. He served in the 
Swedish military in 1990, for a mandatory ten months. He naturalized as a U.S. citizen 
in 2008.8 He began working for a DoD contractor in 2012, and was determined eligible 
for a DoD security clearance in August 2012, after relinquishing his foreign passport to 
his FSO. In August 2013, Applicant requested the passport be returned to him so that 
he could renew it and obtain a Swedish passport for his newborn son. Applicant’s 
children are eligible for Swedish citizenship by virtue of his birthplace. He relinquished 
his new passport to his FSO in November 2013, and the expired, invalidated passport in 
                                                          
5 Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs Fact Sheet, U.S. Relations with Sweden, (2016), at 
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2880.htm. 
 
6 Applicant’s spouse is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Israel.  His mother-in-law and father-in-law are U.S. 
citizens, residing in the United States. Applicant’s children were born in the U.S. and are dual citizens of 
Sweden. 
 
7 GE 1. 
 
8 Applicant closed his bank account in Sweden when he moved to the United States. He has no financial 
interests in Sweden. 
 
 
4 
 
April 2014.9 He has not used his foreign passport to travel after he was granted a 
security clearance, but he did travel to Sweden using his foreign passport in 2009, 2010 
and 2011, before he received a security clearance. He traveled to Sweden on his U.S. 
passport in 2013, 2014 and 2016, and notified his employer each time in accordance 
with company security policies. Applicant also voted in Swedish elections in 2009 and 
2014 by use of mail-in ballots. He wanted to keep his Swedish citizenship so that he can 
return for an extended period to care for his aging parents if the need arises. He has no 
financial or property interests in Sweden, but may inherit from his parents upon their 
death. If such an occasion arises, he intends to liquidate any property and return the 
funds to the United States.  
 
 Applicant was unaware of the concerns with exercising the benefits of foreign 
citizenship while holding a security clearance such as renewing a passport and voting in 
a foreign election. He understood that he was only required to relinquish his passport to 
his FSO and not travel with it. In testimony, he acknowledged a renewed understanding 
of the responsibilities placed on a clearance holder, and vowed to refrain from voting or 
using his foreign passport for any reason. He has no intent to return to Sweden to live. 
He expressed his full allegiance to the United States. His family and work are in the 
United States, and he enjoys the freedoms and values in this country, especially 
religious freedom, and would report any unauthorized attempt by anyone to gain 
protected information from him. 
 
 Applicant has family and friends who are residents and citizens of Sweden. They 
include his parents (ages 69 and 71), aunt and uncle, three cousins and two friends. 
None of his family or friends are affiliated with the Swedish government or military, and 
except for his parents, he has not shown a particularly close relationship with his family 
members or friends. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
9 The old passport expired in 2013. The renewed passport expires in 2026. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s parents, aunt and uncle, cousins and friends are citizens and 
residents of Sweden. His contacts in Sweden may create a potential conflict of interest, 
but no heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion is present. AG ¶ 7(b) has been raised by the evidence, but ¶ 7(a) is not 
applicable. Sweden is not known to target United States citizens or obtain protected 
information, nor is it associated with a heightened risk of terrorism. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Sweden, but they are outweighed 
by his established relationships and loyalties in the United States. Applicant’s parents 
are 69 and 71 years old. None of his foreign contacts are associated with the Swedish 
government or military. He does not own property or financial interests in Sweden, 
besides the possibility of a future inheritance. He has no desire to live in Sweden, but 
may have to care for his parents if needed. He, his wife, and their children are U.S. 
citizens residing in the U.S. His children were born in the U.S. and his work, home and 
financial interests are in the U.S. He credibly testified about his loyalty to the United 
States and that he would report any unauthorized attempt by anyone to gain protected 
information from him. 
 
 
7 
 
 I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of the United States and the interests of the Swedish government 
or any foreign interest. There is little risk associated with a conflict of interest, because 
Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflicts in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 
8(a) and 8(b) are applicable. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(7) voting in a foreign election; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 Applicant possessed a current Swedish passport as a dual citizen, and renewed 
it after it was relinquished to his FSO while he held a security clearance. He exercised 
his Swedish citizenship by renewing his Swedish passport, obtaining a foreign passport 
for his son, and voted in Swedish elections. These actions implicate AG ¶¶ 10(a) and 
10(b).  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. He keeps his Swedish 
citizenship only to facilitate an extended stay in Sweden if required to care for his aging 
parents, and wanted his son to have his dual citizenship. He did not travel with the 
passport while holding a security clearance, and he always informed his employer of his 
personal travels to Sweden. He has since surrendered the old and renewed passport to 
his FSO, with the understanding that they must remain in his employer’s possession as 
 
8 
 
a condition of his security clearance. AG ¶ 11(e) applies. Without understanding the 
security significance, he voted in two Swedish elections, once before and once after 
obtaining a security clearance. He has expressed a new understanding of the concerns 
about exercising the rights of foreign citizenship while holding a security clearance, and 
vowed to refrain from any further such actions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s ties to 
Sweden, but they are far outweighed by his established relationships and loyalties in the 
United States. 
 
Applicant now understands with greater clarity the security concerns related to 
his use of a foreign passport after it has been surrendered as a condition of his security 
clearance, and about exercising his rights of foreign citizenship, such as voting in 
foreign elections. He has acknowledged a renewed understanding of the security 
implications of his actions. His loyalty and security consciousness were never in doubt. 
His actions were not malicious or hidden from his employer, and his reasoning was not 
unusual. His FSO and colleague testified favorably. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a - 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
