 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01724 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but she did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 13, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on January 11, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 21, 2016. She responded with a letter and attached 
documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 and 1(A) through 1(J). The 
case was assigned to me on March 22, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the 
FORM and AE 1 and 1(A) through 1(J) are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since May 2012. She is a high school graduate. She is married 
with two adult children.1  
 
 Applicant worked in a public school from 2009 through at least 2012. She was 
reprimanded for incidents that occurred in about April 2012 for “exercising poor 
judgment and using inappropriate physical force when [she] interacted with multiple 
students in [her] care.” The school’s investigation concluded that Applicant (1) pushed a 
non-verbal female student and cursed at her; (2) plucked a female student in the face 
when the student spat at Applicant; and (3) boxed a male student on his ears. A letter of 
reprimand was prepared in April 2012, but Applicant denied receiving a copy. She 
stated the principal retired and never issued her the letter. Applicant did not work at the 
high school over the summer.2 
 
 Applicant received a letter of reprimand from the new principal of the high school 
in September 2012. She was reprimanded for an incident that occurred in May 2012 in 
which she was observed “yelling at a female special education student on the track.” 
According to a witness, “the student turned her back on [Applicant]. [Applicant] then 
allegedly grabbed her, spun her around and continued chastising her for walking and 
not running on the track.” Additionally, in June 2012, Applicant “left the school without 
following proper leave procedures.” Applicant and her supervisor met in June 2012 and 
on August 28, 2012, to discuss the May 2012 incident. The September 2012 letter of 
reprimand referenced the April 2012 reprimand letter and stated it “was given to 
[Applicant] in a meeting from the principal.”3 
 
                                                          
1 Items 1-3; AE 1.  
 
2 Items 1-3; AE 1, 1(G), 1(H).  
 
3 Item 1; AE 1, 1(F), 1(H). The SOR alleged that Applicant was reprimanded in April 2011 “for being too 
rough with a student.” It did not allege any reprimands in 2012. There is no evidence that Applicant was 
reprimanded in 2011. The SOR allegation was based on statements made by Applicant during her 
background interview that describe a reprimand in April 2011. Apparently, either Applicant or the 
interviewer got the year wrong. I consider SOR ¶ 2.a to refer to the first incident in the April 2012 letter 
that Applicant “pushed a non-verbal female student and cursed at her.” The remaining two incidents in the 
April 2012 letter and the incidents described in the September 2012 reprimand were unalleged conduct. 
Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be 
considered in gauging Applicant’s credibility, when assessing mitigation, and in the whole-person 
analysis. 
 
3 
 
Applicant essentially denied committing the conduct alleged in the letters of 
reprimand, as the matters involved incidental contact or they never occurred. She 
provided a letter from the mother of the girl that Applicant allegedly pushed. The mother 
does not believe Applicant was abusive to her daughter, as her daughter never 
mentioned it to her. Applicant stated that she received training from the school that 
taught her “how to deal with and overcome offensive disruptive student behavior.” A 
November 2015 memorandum from the high school indicates that “[t]here have been no 
additional employee performance issues since [the September 2012] reprimand.” 
Applicant submitted a letter from her facility security officer (FSO) attesting to her 
excellent job performance, loyalty, and trustworthiness.4 
 
Applicant had financial problems, which she attributed to her husband’s 
employment issues beginning in about 2009, and her two children entering college in 
2008 and 2009. She wrote that “[w]ith the brunt of the financial responsibility and the 
care of a husband and two children [she] had to place most of the credit cards and 
outstanding bills in [her] name, thus making it difficult to keep them paid up to date and 
[they] lived paycheck to paycheck.”5 
 
The SOR alleges two unpaid judgments and eight delinquent debts. However, 
the evidence suggests that the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($623) and 1.g ($623) 
and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($2,353) and 1.h ($2,055) are duplicates. SOR ¶ 
1.c alleges a $9,424 debt. Credit reports indicate that the creditor charged off $9,424, 
but the highest balance reported is $8,341. In her response to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($305), 1.c ($9,424), 1.d ($1,405), 1.e 
($2,353), 1.i ($327), and 1.j ($1,629). She indicated that she would borrow from her 
mother to pay the debts.6 
 
Applicant borrowed from her mother in December 2015 and paid or settled the 
following debts: SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($305), 1.d ($1,405), 1.e ($2,353 – settled for $1,411), and 
1.i ($327). Applicant stated that the $9,424 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is “in recovery,” 
and that she was “awaiting official documentation” from the creditor, who informed 
Applicant that the process could take between 8 and 16 weeks. The August 2015 credit 
report shows the balance of the SOR ¶ 1.c debt as $1,816 with the last payment in July 
2015. The February 2016 credit report shows the balance of the debt as $1,216 with the 
last payment in September 2015. Applicant stated that she would borrow from her 
mother again and pay the remaining debts that she could identify as belonging to her.7 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
July 2012. She answered “No” to the following question regarding her employment at 
the high school: 
                                                          
4 Items 1, 3-6; AE 1(H)-1(J).  
 
5 Items 1, 3 ; AE 1.  
 
6 Items 1, 3-6; AE 1(A).  
 
7 Items 1, 5, 6; AE 1, 1(A)-1(E).  
 
4 
 
For this employment, in the last seven (7) years have you received a 
written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for 
misconduct in the workplace, such as a violation of security policy?  
 
Applicant also answered “No” to all the financial questions under Section 26, including 
the following: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had a judgment entered against you. 
(Include financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well 
as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you defaulted on any type of loan? (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor 
or guarantor).  
 
You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor).8    
 
 Applicant was interviewed for her background investigation on August 22, 2012. 
She discussed a reprimand, but she stated it occurred in April 2011. Applicant stated 
that a student began to fall when she was walking down the hall and Applicant grabbed 
the student by the arm to steady her. Applicant stated that someone reported that she 
grabbed a student and pushed her against the wall and that Applicant told the student 
that she was on her “[expletive] list.” Applicant told the investigator that she received a 
letter of reprimand from her supervisor. She stated that there were no other problems or 
issues with her employment at the high school.9 
 
 Applicant also discussed her finances during her background investigation. She 
stated that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was for a car loan for her son that he stopped 
paying. Applicant stated that she had been paying $200 a month to the creditor since 
2010 or 2011, and the balance was down to a little over $7,000. She stated her debts 
                                                          
8 Item 2.  
 
9 Item 3.  
 
 
5 
 
occurred because of her children and the need to pay the mortgage rather than the 
debts.10 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. She stated that she did not 
receive the April 2012 letter of reprimand until after she submitted the SF 86. The 
second letter was dated after the SF 86. The report of investigation that summarized 
Applicant’s background interview indicated that Applicant admitted that she received a 
letter of reprimand from her supervisor. She also stated that there were no other 
problems or issues with her employment at the high school. However, the April 2012 
letter was from the principal, not the supervisor, and the high school confirmed that only 
the principal can issue a letter of reprimand.11 There is insufficient evidence for a 
determination that Applicant received the April 2012 letter of reprimand before she 
submitted the SF 86 and that she intentionally falsified the question regarding her 
employment at the high school. 
 
Applicant stated that it was never her intention to “hide or not tell the truth” about 
her debts. She stated that she “just did not realize at the time that [her] debt was in that 
dire of condition.” The FSO did not go over the SF 86 with her or “explain the sensitivity 
of the whole process.” Applicant wrote that she “would like to deeply apologize for not 
fully understanding the overall impact of having these delinquent accounts and not filling 
out the SF 86 in detail.” She assured that it would not happen again.12   
 
The judgment was awarded in September 2005, close to seven years before the 
SF 86, and Applicant stated she was unaware of it. I do not find that she intentionally 
falsified the question about judgments. However, other debts became delinquent within 
the seven-year period.13 I am convinced by substantial evidence14 that Applicant was 
aware that she had delinquent debts before the SF 86 was issued and that she 
intentionally falsified the SF 86 when she failed to report the debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
10 Item 3.  
 
11 Items 1, 3; AE 1.  
 
12 Item 1; AE 1.  
 
13 Items 4-6.  
 
14 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 
5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
6 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant paid or settled four of the eight non-duplicate debts alleged in the SOR. 
There is some question about the largest debt alleged in the SOR in that recent credit 
reports show payments and the balance reduced to $1,216. Her finances are less than 
perfect, but she has a plan to resolve her financial problems, and she has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. Financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated.   
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant intentionally falsified the 
question on her SF 86 regarding her employment at the high school. AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
applicable to SOR ¶ 2.b, and that allegation is concluded for Applicant. Applicant did 
intentionally falsify the SF 86 when she failed to report her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is applicable to SOR ¶ 2.c. 
Applicant’s workplace issues reflect questionable judgment and an unwillingness 
to comply with rules and regulations. They also created a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) are applicable. 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
Applicant received remedial training from the high school, and the school 
indicated in November 2015 that “[t]here have been no additional employee 
performance issues since [the September 2012] reprimand.” Applicant’s workplace 
issues at the high school are mitigated.  
 
 Having determined that Applicant intentionally provided false information on the 
SF 86, I have also determined that her statement that the omission was unintentional 
was also false. It would be inconsistent to find that conduct mitigated.15   
 
 
 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
 
10 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and the steps she has 
taken to correct her financial problems. However, Applicant was untruthful about her 
finances on her SF 86. Self-reporting is a fundamental requirement for clearance 
holders.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but she did not mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
