1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 15-01785
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 15, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On September 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On October 22, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, including
attachments, and she requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of
a hearing. (Item 1.) On December 9, 2015, Department Counsel issued the
Department's written case. On December 9, 2015, a complete copy of the file of
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel
offered seven documentary exhibits. (Items 1-7.) Applicant was given the opportunity to
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response
was due on January 15, 2016. Applicant submitted additional evidence, which has been
identified and entered into evidence without objection as Items A through G. The case
2
was assigned to this Administrative Judge on February 4, 2016. Based upon a review of
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 47 years old, married, and she has one adult child. She is employed
as a technical writer by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists seven allegations (1.a. through 1.g.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts and bankruptcies, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The
complete amount of the alleged delinquent debts in the SOR total approximately
$29,000. The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed
on the SOR:
1.a.  This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a tax lien to the Federal
Government entered against Applicant in September 2004 in the amount of $12,849.
Applicant denied this allegation in her RSOR. She wrote, “payment of $200 a month set
up.” Applicant also wrote that she had contacted the IRS and was informed that the tax
lien for this debt was released many years ago. Applicant’s attachment to her RSOR
shows that this lien was satisfied. (Item 1.) I find that this debt has been resolved.
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for delinquent taxes owed to the
Federal Government for tax years 2010 and 2011 in the amount of $15,000. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR. She wrote that she and her husband are currently
on a payment plan to repay the delinquent taxes, wherein each year after they submit
their tax returns the IRS garnishes any refunds that they may be owed. She contended
that her balance at this time was approximately $4,000. (Item 1.) A Post-FORM
document from the IRS shows that as of December 19, 2012, Applicant owed
$12,521.27 for tax years 2007, 2010, and 2011. (Item F.)
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $187. Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR. She wrote that she has made
payments toward this debt, but at this time she does not know what company holds this
debt. (Item 1.) I do not find that Applicant has established this debt has been resolved or
reduced. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $161. Applicant denied this allegation in her RSOR, and wrote that she had contacted
this company and they confirmed that this debt had been paid in full. (Item 1.) Applicant
submitted no evidence showing this debt has been satisfied, and the credit report dated
3
July 24, 2014, shows this debt is still owing. (Item 4.)  I do not find that Applicant has
established this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the
amount of $1,096. Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR. She wrote that she
had contacted the creditor and set up payment plan in which, starting on August 8,
2014, she would send $100 a month toward this debt. She further wrote that she had
sent one $100 check, which was returned to her uncashed with a notation that the
creditor could not accept payment. (Item 1.) I find that this debt is still owing by
Applicant and has not been resolved or reduced.
1.f. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in
approximately September 2006, and in approximately August 2012 her dischargeable
debts were discharged. Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR 
1.g. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in
approximately August 1999 and this bankruptcy was dismissed in approximately
November 1999. Applicant admitted this allegation in her RSOR 
Applicant explained that she and her husband filed for bankruptcy two times
because her husband, who was operating his own home-building business,  is “horrible
at business and he failed to manage his money appropriately.”  She also averred that
she has resolved additional debts that were not listed on the SOR. 
Applicant reiterated in a post-FORM letter that her overdue debts occurred
primarily because of the problems her husband had with his business. She also wrote
that over the past 10 years she and her husband have spent all of their extra money
towards their son’s education. She wrote, “There are certain considerations you have to
take [sic] in your life. And maybe I should have been paying our Government all this
money [for the past taxes that she owes] so that our politicians could build illegal
servers and default on their own tax payments.” (Item A)
Applicant offered no documents into evidence which would show her current
financial status, including the income of her and her husband or their expenditures and
debts, and whether she is resolving her present debts in a timely manner. Applicant also
submitted no character letters, employment evaluations, or any other information to give
any insight into her character and employment record.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, much of it several years old,
which has not been satisfied, and filed for bankruptcy two times. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” I do not
find that this condition is applicable since Applicant explained the financial difficulties
occurred because of her husband’s poor business skills and to pay for her son’s
education, neither of which were conditions beyond the person’s control. Therefore, I
find that this mitigating condition is not a factor for consideration in this case.
Since there is no evidence that Applicant has taken any kind of counseling to
better manage her finances I do not find that AG ¶  20(c) is applicable. While some
debts were paid or reduced a significant amount of delinquent debt remains unresolved.
Therefore, AG ¶  20(d) is also not applicable. Finally, I do not find any other mitigating
condition applies to this case, since no evidence was introduced to establish that
Applicant’s current financial status is stable and that she is able to resolve her past
debts or stay current with her recent debts. Therefore, I find Guideline F against
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating conditions are
applicable, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the
whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b. - 1.g.: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
