 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ADP Case No. 15-05871 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas R. Velvel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 10, 2014, Applicant applied for a public trust position and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On 
February 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
and modified (Regulation); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
                                                          
 
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated December 10, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to make an affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a contract 
with the DOD. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether such eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 14, 2016. In a sworn 
statement, dated March 24, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On April 19, 2016, Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to 
me on June 6, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on June 28, 2016. I convened the 
hearing, as scheduled, on July 14, 2016.  
 
 During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 4), ten Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE J), and one administrative exhibit were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 
26, 2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took 
advantage of that opportunity. She timely submitted a number of additional documents, 
which were marked as AE K through AE P, and admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record closed on August 11, 2016. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments and explanations, 
all of the factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) 
of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions, comments, and explanations, are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a full-
time claims auditor for a defense contractor since July 1999.2 She is seeking to retain 
her eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a contract with the DOD. 
She has never served in the U.S. military.3 She is a 1978 high school graduate.4 
Applicant was married in October 1989 and has been informally separated since 
December 1999.5 She has two daughters, born in 1990 and 1995.6 
 
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 11.  
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 8-9. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13-14. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations7 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until sometime in late 
1999 when her husband left the marital residence, leaving Applicant with two small 
children and zero child support.8 With insufficient income to fully support her children, 
Applicant resorted to credit card utilization and reliance. The result was increased 
account balances, and the commencement of a downward spiral of her finances, 
eventually leading to account delinquencies. Accounts were placed for collection. 
Starting in April 2013, and continuing for approximately one year, Applicant utilized the 
professional services of a debt consolidation, settlement, and payment organization, in 
an effort to resolve her debts. She paid the company $500 each month during that 
period, but had to stop when she had insufficient funds to continue doing so.9 As soon 
as she had accumulated additional funds to be able to restart her debt resolution efforts, 
Applicant contacted her creditors to set up repayment plans and start making payments. 
The SOR identified five purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $15,523, as reflected by the December 2014 credit report,10 and the June 
2015 credit report.11 Those debts and their respective current status, according to the 
credit reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, and 
Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described below:  
SOR ¶ 1.a.: This is a credit card with a $13,200 credit limit and a past-due 
balance of $13,904 that was placed for collection. In October 2013, $15,238 was 
charged off.12 Some payments were made through the debt consolidation, settlement, 
and payment organization in 2013, but they eventually stopped. Applicant subsequently 
contacted the collection agent to establish a repayment plan, and under that plan, with 
the initial payment of $100 made in March 2016,13 commencing in April 2016, she has 
made monthly payments of $200.14 In July 2016, the collection agent noted that the 
remaining balance had been reduced to $13,004.82, and it offered Applicant a 
settlement of $5,000 to resolve the account.15 It is unclear if Applicant accepted the offer 
                                                          
7
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits:  GE 1, supra note 1; GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated 
December 20, 2014); GE 2 (Equifax Credit Report, dated June 2, 2015); GE 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated 
March 24. 2015); Answer to the SOR, dated March 24, 2016. More recent information can be found in the exhibits 
furnished and individually identified. 
 
8
 GE 4, supra note 7, at 2; Tr. at 28-30. 
 
9
 GE 4, supra note 7, at 2; Tr. At 48-49. 
 
10
 GE 3, supra note 7. 
 
11
 GE 2, supra note 7. 
 
12
 GE 3, supra note 7, at 5. 
 
13
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 3. 
 
14
 AE G (Letter, dated April 8, 2016); AE H (Letter, dated May 9, 2016); Tr. at 42. 
 
15
 AE K (Letter, dated July 20, 2016). 
 
4 
                                      
 
or if she simply continues to make her monthly payments. The account is in the process 
of being resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.b.: This is a bank credit card with a $1,000 credit limit and unpaid and 
past-due balance of $1,031 that was placed for collection.16 Applicant contacted the 
collection agent to establish either a settlement agreement or a repayment plan, and 
both were achieved. Under the settlement agreement, the balance was reduced to 
$515.69, and Applicant made an initial payment of $91.67 in March 2016.17 Applicant 
was obligated to make four monthly payments of $106, for a total of $424, and the 
remainder would be forgiven and the account satisfied.18 She made those four 
payments.19 The account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e.: These are medical accounts for professional services 
received by Applicant or her daughters with unpaid balances of $438, $55.60, and 
$93.60 that were placed for collection.20  Applicant was not aware of the outstanding 
balances until she saw them in her credit report because she has health insurance. She 
contacted the collection agents to set up repayment plans. Using her debit card, 
Applicant paid one collection agent $55.60 and $93.60 on March 15, 2016,21 and the 
other collection agent $438 the following day.22 The accounts have been resolved. 
Applicant has vowed to never put herself into this type of financial situation again, 
and indicated she would get a second job if necessary. She stopped using credit cards, 
and she only uses her debit card or cash for all her financial transactions. Now that her 
daughters are independent, her expenses have been substantially reduced.23 
Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement indicates a monthly net income of $2,200, and 
normal monthly expenses, including her continuing credit card payments and 
miscellaneous payments, of $2,209. Although she calculated that she had a monthly 
remainder of $332 available for saving or spending,24 it appears that she erred 
somewhere because, based on her figures, she would have a $9 deficit each month.25 
                                                          
16
 GE 3, supra note 7, at 5; GE 2, supra note 7, at 2. 
 
17
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 3. 
 
18
 AE C (Letter, dated March 22, 2016). 
 
19
 AE D (Letter, dated April 6, 2016); AE E (Letter, dated May 6, 2016); AE F (Letter, dated June 7, 2016); 
AE A (Letter, dated July 6, 2016). 
 
20
 GE 3, supra note 7, at 8. 
 
21
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 4; AE B (Letter, dated March 16, 2016); Tr. At 45-47. 
 
22
 Answer to the SOR, supra note 7, at 4; AE I (Letter, dated March 18, 2016); Tr. At 45-47. 
 
23
 Tr. at 37, 44. 
 
24
 AE O (Personal Financial Statement, undated). 
 
25
 Applicant received a salary increase three days before the hearing, and it appears that she may have 
failed to consider that increase when calculating her monthly net income. See Tr. at 30, 34; AE J (Letter, dated June 
30, 2016). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
She has between $5,000 and $10,000 in her 401(k) retirement account.26 Applicant has 
no other outstanding debts. In the absence of any additional unidentified delinquencies, 
it appears that Applicant's financial problems are finally under control.  
Character References and Community Service 
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor, currently the manager of customer service, has 
known Applicant since July 1999. He characterized her as a detailed, hardworking, 
loyal, and trustworthy team member who requires very little supervision. He noted that 
Applicant had been promoted several times, taking on higher levels of responsibility 
each time.27 The vice president of the engagement center described Applicant as 
possessing a strong work ethic, dedication, and organization skills. She is an exemplary 
employee who has received high marks on her annual evaluations for exceeding 
expectations.28 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [position of public trust].”29 As Commander in 
Chief, the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on 
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to 
have access to such information. Positions designated as ADP-I and ADP-II are 
classified as “sensitive positions.”30 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment 
to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, 
reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”31 DOD contractor personnel 
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.32  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
26
 Tr. at 35. 
 
27
 AE M (Character Reference, dated July 19, 2016). 
 
28
 AE N (Character Reference, dated July 21, 2016). 
 
29
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
30
 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, and C3.1.2.2. See also Regulation app. 10, ¶ 10.2. 
 
31
 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
32
 Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. It should be noted that a memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense 
for Counterintelligence and Security, Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases, dated November 19, 2004, covers the 
handling of trustworthiness cases under the Directive. The memorandum directed the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) to continue to utilize the Directive in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”33 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.34 
  
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
Furthermore, security clearance determinations, and by inference, public trust 
determinations, should err, if they must, on the side of denials.35 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
33
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
34
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
35
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
Under AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying. Also, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise trustworthiness concerns. Applicant’s initial financial problems arose in 1999 
when she started resorting to credit card utilization and reliance to pay her bills. 
Increased account balances and insufficient funds to maintain those balances in a 
current status resulted in delinquencies. Accounts were placed for collection and one 
was charged off. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) have been established.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 20(b), financial trustworthiness concerns may be mitigated 
where “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”36 
                                                          
36
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
8 
                                      
 
AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. The nature, 
frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing multi-year period of financial difficulties 
since 1999 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” Applicant’s initial financial problems were caused by events that were 
largely beyond her control: her husband left the marital residence, leaving Applicant with 
two small children and zero child support. What followed was an extended period of her 
reliance on credit cards to pay her bills. With insufficient income to address her debts, 
those accounts lay dormant until 2013.  
 
During 2013 and 2014, Applicant utilized the professional services of a debt 
consolidation, settlement, and payment organization in an effort to resolve her debts. 
She paid the company $500 each month during that period, but had to stop when she 
had insufficient funds to continue doing so. As soon as she had accumulated additional 
funds to be able to restart her debt resolution efforts, Applicant contacted her creditors 
to set up repayment plans and started making payments. She is on a repayment plan 
with one creditor and has reduced the original unpaid balance of $15,238 to a more 
manageable settlement offer of $5,000. It is unclear if she accepted the offer or if she 
simply is continuing with her monthly payments. She resolved the four other SOR debts.  
 
Given Applicant’s new appreciation of financial stability and her focused efforts to 
resolve her one remaining delinquent debt, it appears that Applicant's financial problems 
are finally under control. Applicant’s actions no longer cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.37 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
37
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.38   
     
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She initially failed 
to exercise restraint on her use of credit cards and saw several accounts become 
delinquent. Her large debt was charged off and four other relatively moderate debts 
languished past-due and unpaid. She started making payments under a debt 
consolidation plan but eventually abandoned it. 
 
 The mitigating evidence is more substantial and compelling. There is no 
evidence of misuse of information technology systems, mishandling protected 
information, or substance abuse. After her husband abandoned Applicant and their two 
small daughters without ever sending Applicant any child support, she tried to maintain 
her monthly payments but soon fell short because of limited funds. In order to survive, 
she resorted to charging her bills to her credit cards. It worked for a short time, but 
those accounts also had to be paid. Applicant waited until her finances improved, and, 
with the assistance of a debt consolidation, settlement, and payment organization, three 
years before the SOR was issued, she started making large monthly payments as long 
as she had the funds to continue doing so. After another period of inaction, and with 
sufficient funds to start addressing her debts again, she contacted her creditors and 
collection agents. The result, so far, is four accounts resolved and one account in a 
repayment plan. There are no other delinquencies.  
 
 Applicant finally embraced the paradigm of fiscal responsibility. Applicant did not 
conceal her financial difficulties when completing her e-QIP. Instead, she was honest 
and forthright, and she reported them. The undisputed developed evidence enables me 
to conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are now 
under control. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
                                                          
38
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 39 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a good track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, limited only by her modest earnings. She no longer has expenses 
associated with her children and she has chosen not to use credit cards, instead opting 
for her debit card.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e.:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position to support a contract with DOD.  Eligibility is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
  
                                                          
39
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
