 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01556 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant 
has made some effort to resolve her delinquent debts by filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection in March 2016, it is not enough to mitigate the underlying financial 
considerations security concern. Applicant also intentionally falsified her March 2012 
security clearance application by failing to disclose any derogatory financial information. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or 
deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing on 
April 13, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, Applicant’s Exhibit’s 
(AE) A through C, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, Department Counsel’s discovery letter to 
Applicant dated December 21, 2015, without objection. After the hearing, the record 
remained open until May 9, 2016 to allow Applicant to submit additional information 
about her finances. Applicant timely submitted AE D, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 25, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 38, works as security guard for a federal contractor. She has been in 
her current position since 2011. Applicant completed her most recent security clearance 
application in March 2012 and did not disclose any derogatory information. However, 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that she owed several delinquent debts. 
Applicant admits owing the debts, but explains that the omission of the delinquent 
accounts from her 2012 security clearance application was not done with intent to 
mislead the Government. According to Applicant, she has completed several security 
clearance applications since her first application in July 2006. Applicant testified that 
while she knew she had incurred new delinquent accounts since her initial security 
clearance application, she decided to follow the advice of co-workers and not change 
any answers on her subsequent applications to avoid raising any “red-flags.”2  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $19,000 in delinquent debts. 
Applicant blames her financial problems on a period of unemployment from April 2011 
to October 2011 after her employer lost the contract on which she had been working. 
She also cites the adverse impact of providing financial assistance to struggling family 
members and friends from 2009 to November 2015. In addition to giving family 
members money, Applicant also co-signed for car loans and apartment leases. In doing 
so, Applicant began having difficulty paying her own financial obligations and she 
accumulated delinquent debt. In 2014, Applicant attempted to resolve her debt through 
a debt consolidation service, but she found it was not resolving her accounts as quickly 
as she would have liked. After withdrawing from the debt consolidation program, 
Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection in March 2016. However, only the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b appear on the bankruptcy petition. Applicant did not know why 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.c. through 1.l were not included in the petition, nor did she 
provide any additional information about the status of these accounts.3  
 
As of December 2015, Applicant no longer provides financial support to any of 
her friends or family members outside of her household, which includes her three 
teenaged children and one grandchild. She believes that she is able to live within her 
means. However, the most recent credit report in the record, dated December 2015 
                                                          
2 Tr. 20-23, 44-47, 74-78; GE 1-4. 
 
3 Tr. 24-28, 31-41, 54-69, 71; GE 2-5; AE A-D. 
 
3 
 
shows that Applicant has accumulated an additional $14,430 in delinquent accounts, 
including a $9,777 judgment.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
4 Tr. 41-43, 52-53, 63, 72-74; GE 4.  
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”5 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $19,000 on ten delinquent accounts and 
that she has two other charged off accounts. Applicant’s admissions to the alleged 
debts and the credit reports in the record establish a prima facie case that Applicant has 
a history of not meeting her financial obligations and that she has demonstrated an 
inability to do so.6 While she receives some credit for her efforts to resolve her 
delinquent debts through a debt consolidation plan in 2014 and her 2016 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy petition, she did not present enough information to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Although Applicant provided a copy of the service agreement she entered into 
with the debt consolidation service, she did not provide any information about the details 
or scope of the agreement. It is unclear how many of her delinquent accounts were 
included in her consolidation plan or how much money she paid under the plan toward 
the resolution of her delinquent accounts. Likewise, with her March 2016 bankruptcy 
petition, Applicant did not provide any explanation as to why 10 of the 12 debts alleged 
in the SOR were excluded from her bankruptcy application. She also failed to provide 
any information about her efforts to resolve the excluded accounts. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control as she continues to incur additional 
delinquent accounts.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when her actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information.7 The SOR alleges 
                                                          
5  AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
7  See  AG ¶15. 
 
 
5 
 
that Applicant deliberately falsified her March 20128 security clearance application by 
failing to disclose derogatory financial information about judgments, defaulted loans, 
collection accounts, charged off accounts, and past-due accounts as required. An 
applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
process raises issues about her reliability and trustworthiness that ultimately calls into 
question her ability to protect classified information.9  Applicant admitted the falsification 
in her answer to the SOR, and explained at the hearing that she chose not to disclose 
the delinquent accounts she accumulated since her previous security clearance 
application. 
 
Making false or misleading statements to the federal government during the 
security-clearance process is serious misconduct, and it is not easily explained away, 
excused, or mitigated. An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, and candid 
answers throughout the investigative process. Anything less provides a rational basis 
for a finding against an applicant’s security worthiness. None of the personal conduct 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
The evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan10 and the clearly-consistent standard, I 
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, 
I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, Applicant did not 
meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This 
case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.l:    Against Applicant    
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
                                                          
8 The SOR mistakenly alleges that the Applicant falsified a security clearance dated March 22, 2013. The 
correct date of the security clearance application at issue is March 22, 2012. 
 
9 See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
10 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
