 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02854 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 26, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and 
Personal Conduct security concerns. Security concerns arose out of Applicant’s 
marijuana use between 1999 and July 2013, to include its use while holding a security 
clearance after 2004. He tested positive for marijuana on a random urinalysis conducted 
in July 2013. Additionally, he was counseled for underage drinking in 2005; and violated 
orders to abstain from alcohol use in February 2006 and June 2006. He also was 
terminated by an employer in 2009 for wrongful behavior. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 23, 2014, Applicant completed an e-QIP. On December 11, 2015, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement; Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 20, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 8, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 8, 
2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 19, 2016. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. (Tr. 13-14.) The 
Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through AE C, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 
31, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old government contractor. He has worked for his 
employer since 2009. He was a member of the Marine Corps from 2004 through 2009, 
and the Marine Corps Reserve from 2009 to January 2014, when he received a general 
discharge. He achieved the rank of E-5. (GE 1; AE B.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance under 
the guidelines for Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct because he used marijuana, 
with varying frequency from 1999 through July 2013, to include its use while holding a 
security clearance after 2004. He tested positive for marijuana on a random urinalysis 
conducted in July 2013, which led to a general discharge for misconduct from the 
Marine Corps Reserves in January 2014. Personal Conduct security concerns arose out 
of Applicant’s marijuana use, outlined above; and his underage consumption of alcohol 
in violation of a lawful order in March 2005, February 2006, and June 2006. Additionally, 
his previous civilian employment was terminated in 2009 as a result of wrongful 
behavior toward a client. All of these facts raise questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 
1.b. 3.a, 3.b. 3.c, 3.d, and 3.e. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 2.a. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1999 to 2003 while in high school, prior to joining 
the Marine Corps. (Tr. 25.) He testified that he has not used marijuana since entering 
the Marine Corps. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
Applicant joined the Marine Corps in 2004. (AE B.) He was approximately 18 
years old at that time. In March 2005 Applicant was counseled for underage 
consumption of alcohol, after his platoon sergeant observed him consuming alcohol. In 
February 2006, and again in June 2006, Applicant was charged with violating Article 92 
of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), for failure to obey a lawful order to 
abstain from underage consumption of alcohol. As a result of his third infraction, 
Applicant was required to complete three alcohol education classes. (GE 2; Tr. 28-34.) 
Applicant acknowledged that he made “bad choices in drinking under age obviously 
against the regulations in the Marine Corps.” (Tr. 18.) 
 
 
3 
 
In August 2009 Applicant was terminated by his previous employer for wrongful 
behavior toward a client. Applicant was working for a Government contractor at that 
time. He had been consuming alcohol with military members on the evening in question. 
One member of their party became intoxicated. Applicant brought the intoxicated Sailor 
to the barracks and tried to put him to bed. However, a physical altercation ensued with 
another Sailor who thought Applicant was being too loud. Applicant admitted to pushing 
the Sailor. As a result of this incident, Applicant was suspended from his position for two 
weeks, and subsequently terminated. (GE 2; Tr. 19-22, 34-35.) 
 
 In July 2013 Applicant’s unit was subject to a random urinalysis. Applicant’s urine 
sample tested positive for Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a chemical compound found in 
marijuana. Applicant requested a new test, but he was not provided any additional 
testing. Applicant was administratively separated from the Marine Corps Reserve with a 
general discharge in January 2014, as a result of this incident. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 35-39.) 
Applicant claimed, for the first time at hearing, that he must have consumed food laced 
with marijuana at a 4th of July party he attended that year. He no longer associates with 
the host of that party. (Tr. 23-25, 39-46.) He provided results of self-procured urinalysis, 
dated May 10, 2016, that tested negative for THC. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant received a number of decorations during his military service, including: 
the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal and the Sea Service Deployment 
Ribbon with 2 stars. (AE B.) He received a certificate of commendation in September 
2012. (AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c). Applicant used marijuana from at least 
1999 to 2003. He tested positive for THC in July 2013. His use of marijuana in July 
2013 occurred after having been granted a security clearance in 2004. The facts, 
 
5 
 
established through the Government’s evidence and Applicant’s admissions, raise 
security concerns under all of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant claimed that his 2013 marijuana use was the result of accidental 
ingestion. However, I do not find this claim credible. He made this argument for the first 
time at hearing, and offered no corroborating evidence to support it. He did not take 
responsibility for his positive drug test. I cannot find that future use is unlikely to occur. 
In this instance, Applicant’s behavior continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. The evidence does not support the application of 
AG ¶ 26(a). 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) provides limited mitigation. Applicant claimed that he no longer 
associates with the drug user who held the 4th of July party in 2013. This is a factor that 
weighs in Applicant’s favor. However, Applicant has a history of illegally using marijuana 
that began in 1999, while he was in high school. Despite his assurances that he is not a 
drug user, based on his past conduct and positive drug test, I am not confident he will 
abstain from marijuana use in the future. He knew of the Marine Corps zero tolerance 
policy concerning illegal drug use. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to 
meet his burden of proof to overcome the concerns raised by his poor judgment in using 
illegal substances, especially while holding a security clearance. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant used marijuana illegally from 1999 to 2003. He used it again in July 
2013. His marijuana use led to no formal charges, but represents criminal conduct 
nonetheless. The facts, established through the Government’s evidence and Applicant’s 
admissions, raise security concerns under the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant presented minimal evidence of rehabilitation. Only three years have 
passed since his last marijuana use. He has not been fully forthright with the 
Government about the circumstances surrounding that use. I cannot find that such 
criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) were not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combine with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
 
7 
 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to 
consideration of: 
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of not following rules and laws. From 1999 to at least 
2003, he illegally used marijuana, a federally controlled substance. He consumed 
alcohol underage, despite the military regulations and direct orders prohibiting it. He 
used marijuana again in 2013, while holding a security clearance, which is in violation of 
federal laws and security policies. He was terminated from his employment in 2009 for 
wrongful behavior toward a client. These actions indicate Applicant has questionable 
judgment, lacks candor, and demonstrates an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. The above disqualifying condition has been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under this 
guideline. The following are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant exhibited a pattern of poor judgment involving alcohol abuse, 
employee misconduct, and marijuana abuse from 1999 to at least 2013. He violated 
laws and security policy by using marijuana after obtaining a security clearance only 
three years ago. Those offenses are not minor. He has failed to acknowledge that 
misconduct or to produce sufficient evidence that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely 
to recur. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) was not established.  
 
 Applicant presented no credible evidence of rehabilitation. He has not met his 
burden to establish positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the Marine 
Corps and received a number of decorations during his military service. He testified he 
has not used marijuana since graduating high school and produced one negative 
urinalysis administered in 2013. However, I find his testimony that he did not knowingly 
ingest marijuana prior to his positive urinalysis test in 2013 lacks credibility, after 
listening to his testimony and observing his demeanor. He has a 14-year history of rule 
violations, including the illegal use of marijuana and alcohol. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a-3.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
