 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03248 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for foreign influence 
under Guideline B. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator from 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on April 15, 2013. (Item 4) After reviewing 
the results of the interview, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On November 25, 2015, DOD 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
foreign influence under Guideline B. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 14, 2015, admitting both allegations 
under Guideline B. He elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 27, 2016. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on February 5, 2016, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. He did not provide any additional 
information in response to the FORM. I was assigned to case on June 9, 2016. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI. Since Applicant did not respond to the FORM, he did not object to the 
admission of the PSI. He waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI. I will 
consider information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant was born in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and is 48 years old. 
He received a bachelor’s degree in 1989 and his first master’s degree in 1993 from a 
university in the PRC. Applicant came to the United States in August 1995 and became 
a United States citizen in June 2008. He attended a university in the United States, 
receiving a master’s degree in May 1997, a doctorate in August 2000, and another 
master’s degree in December 2004. From June 2000 until March 2012 he was a 
manager at a national housing financial agency. He has been employed as a senior 
managing consultant by a defense contractor since March 2012. He married a citizen 
and resident of the PRC in the PRC in April 1995. His wife became a United States 
citizen in June 2008. They have two children born in the United States, who are 
residents and citizens of the United States. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated February 14, 2013; 
Item 3, PSI, dated April 15, 2013)  
 
Applicant admits the two foreign influence allegations in the SOR. He admits that 
his parents and his brother are citizens and residents of the PRC. He also admits that 
his mother-in-law and his father–in-law are residents and citizens of the PRC.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant reported on his e-QIP, in response to question 20C asking for foreign 
travel in the last seven years, and to security investigators, that he made numerous 
return trips to the PRC with his wife and children to see his family since leaving in 1995. 
He reported a 21 to 30 day visit from December 2002 until January 2003; a 21 to 30 day 
visit in August 2005; and an 11 to 20 day visit in June 2009 until July 2009. Applicant 
also reported that from September 2012 until December 2012, he worked in the PRC on 
a project for his employer. He stayed at a hotel during this visit. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated 
February 14, 2013; Item 3, PSI, dated April 15, 2013, at 3 - 4) 
 
Applicant’s parents are retired chemists who are citizens and residents of the 
PRC. Neither of them have worked for or been affiliated with the PRC government. 
Applicant has monthly telephone contact with them. Applicant sees them when he visits 
the PRC. Applicant’s brother is a college professor who is also a resident and citizen of 
the PRC. Applicant has monthly telephone contact with him and sees him on his visits 
to the PRC. Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are both retired engineers and 
citizens and residents of the PRC. Neither of them worked for or are affiliated with the 
PRC government. Applicant reports that they also have a United States green card and 
are planning in the future to come to the United States and become United States 
citizens. Applicant’s in-laws come to the United States yearly to visit. Applicant and his 
wife have weekly telephone contact with them. The in-laws stay with his family when 
they make their yearly trips to the U.S. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated February 14, 2013; Item 3, 
PSI, dated April 15, 2013, at 2) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning the PRC. The PRC 
has an authoritarian government dominated by the Communist Party. It has large and 
increasingly sophisticated military forces. The U.S. and the PRC have been rivals since 
the Cold War, with particular disagreements on the status of Taiwan. Despite political 
disagreements, the U.S. and the PRC have become major economic and trading 
partners. The PRC aggressively targets sensitive and protected U.S. technology and 
military information, using worldwide intelligence operations. It is one of the most 
aggressive practitioners of industrial espionage. There are an estimated 2,000-3,000 
PRC-front companies operating in the U.S. to gather secret or proprietary information. 
U.S. citizens of Chinese ancestry are considered prime intelligence targets. 
 
The PRC has a poor human rights record. It suppresses political dissent, and it 
practices arbitrary arrest, detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners. Travelers to the PRC can expect to be placed under surveillance, with their 
hotel rooms, telephones, and fax machines monitored and personal possessions, 
including computers, searched without their knowledge or consent. (Item 4) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
 
5 
 
 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant’s parents, brother, and in-laws are long time citizens and residents of 
PRC. He has weekly telephone contact with them. He also sees them or his trips back 
to the PRC and when his in-laws’ yearly visits Applicant and his family in the United 
States. His in-laws have green cards and anticipate becoming United States citizens in 
the future. Applicant lives with his wife and children and his wife has contacts with her 
parents and her in-laws in the PRC, This family situation also raises a security concern, 
His parents, brother, and in-laws residence and citizenship in the PRC and his and his 
wife’s contact with them raises the following Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions 
under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information: and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Appellant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can 
have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as 
important to their vital interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress. The PRC’s authoritarian government, 
aggressive targeting of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and military information, 
 
6 
 
 
poor human rights record, and intelligence targeting of U.S. citizens of Chinese ancestry 
places a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion on Applicant.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. There is a rebuttable presumption that 
a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, his immediate family members of the 
family members of his spouse. Applicant did not present any information that rebuts this 
presumption. The presence of Applicant’s parents, brother, and in-laws in the PRC 
creates a security concern. Applicant did not present any information that would negate 
the heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion because of the presence of the family members in the PRC and the 
intelligence activities of the PRC. Accordingly, Applicant has not met his heavy burden 
to show that his relationships with his family members in the PRC are not a security 
concern. I conclude Appellant has not mitigated security concerns for foreign influence 
with the PRC. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The presence of Applicant’s parent, brother, and in-laws in the PRC creates a 
heightened risk of foreign influence leading to the potential for vulnerability, pressure, or 
coercion of Applicant by China against the interest of the United States. Applicant has 
close and frequent contact with his relatives in the PRC. These facts leave me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated foreign 
influence security concerns based on his close contact with his family members in the 
PRC. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
