 
1 
 
 
                                                               
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00930 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). On February 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether her 
clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
On March 9, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 19, 2106, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On May 2, 2016, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On May 19, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for June 8, 2016. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 
and Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II, which were received into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was received into 
evidence without objection. On June 16, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.).  
  
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice (HE II), 
requesting that I take administrative notice of the summary of facts pertaining to Cuba 
contained in HE II as well as seven source documents. Without objection, I took 
administrative notice as requested. (Tr. 14-15)  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Cuba were derived from HE II and its source documents and are contained, in whole or 
in part, infra under the subheading “Cuba” of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
  
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old general office worker employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2013. She seeks a secret security clearance as a 
requirement of her continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 17-20)  
 
Applicant was born in Cuba in 1969. She was educated in Cuba, and was 
awarded a licenciada en educacion in July 1993. Applicant described her degree in 
Cuba as comparable to a master’s degree in elementary education. (GE 1; Tr. 25-26) In 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
June 1994, at age 25, Applicant immigrated to the United States via Peru and was given 
asylum under the “wet-foot, dry-foot policy.” She received her “green card” in 1995 and 
became a U.S. citizen in September 2007.  Applicant was issued her U.S. passport in 
March 2008 that expires in March 2018. (GE 1; Tr. 20-24, 47-48)  
 
 She married in December 2004, although she and her now husband have been 
a couple since 1997. Her husband is a U.S. born citizen and is employed full-time as a 
high voltage lineman for a utility company. Applicant has a 17-year-old daughter who 
recently graduated from high school and plans to attend college, and a 12-year-old son 
who is in middle school. (GE 1; Tr. 26-30) 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Security concerns were identified under this Guideline as a result of Applicant 
having a father, brother, and sister who were resident citizens of Cuba. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The 
status of Applicant’s relatives has changed substantially since the SOR was issued in 
February 2016, and those changes are discussed infra.  
 
Applicant is one of five children – three live in the United States and two live in 
Cuba. Applicant’s parents as well as Applicant and her siblings were born and raised in 
Cuba. (GE 1) Applicant has two brothers, ages 52 and 50, and has three sisters, ages 
53, 49, and 45. (GE 1) 
 
Immediate Family Members Living and Deceased in Cuba (alleged in SOR) - 
Since these proceedings were initiated, Applicant’s father passed away in Cuba in 
March 2016, at age 80. He was a retired brick mason and was not associated with the 
Cuban government. (Tr. 31; AE A)  
 
Applicant has a 52-year-old brother who lives in Cuba and is a carpenter by 
trade. He is a dual citizen of Spain and Cuba, holds a Spanish passport, and travels 
freely back and forth between the United States and Cuba. He is not associated with the 
Cuban government. (GE 1; Tr. 33-34, 37-40) Applicant has a 45-year-old sister who 
lives in Cuba and is a physician. Applicant communicates with her 45-year-old sister by 
telephone “maybe one time a month.” (Tr. 38-40, 53) Applicant’s physician-sister has 
been on a leave of absence since shortly before her father died to care for him and as 
of the hearing date had not returned to work. (Tr. 54-56) Applicant’s brother and sister 
living in Cuba hope to immigrate to the United States to join the rest of her family. (Tr. 
56, 60) 
 
Immediate Family Members Living in the United States (not alleged in SOR) 
– Applicant has a 70 year-year-old mother, who was a career housewife and lives with 
Applicant and her husband. (Tr. 30-31) Applicant has a 53-year-old sister who lives in 
the United States. She is a housewife and lives with her significant other. Applicant has 
frequent contact with this sister and sees her about once a month. (Tr. 32, 34-35) 
Applicant has a 50-year-old brother who lives in the United States. He is employed as a 
truck driver, is married, and has two children. Applicant sees this brother and his family 
frequently. (Tr. 35-36) Applicant has a 49-year-old sister who lives in the United States. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
She is employed as a grocery store assistant manager, is married, and has one child. 
Applicant sees her 49-year-old sister frequently. (Tr. 36-37) 
 
Applicant’s husband’s mother, older brother, and a large extended family live 
nearby. Applicant and her husband see their respective families frequently and split 
their time shared between the two families “[a]bout 50-50.”  (Tr. 41-42) 
 
Applicant and her husband own a home in the United States valued at $300,000. 
They have three automobiles, a boat, checking and savings accounts, and retirement 
accounts, all of which are in the United States. Applicant’s family assets approximate 
$520,000 in contrast to having no assets in Cuba. Since Applicant arrived in the United 
States in 1994, she has only been to Cuba three times and the last time was in 2009 to 
visit her late grandparents. (GE 1; Tr. 42-46, 49) Applicant does not have a valid Cuban 
passport and has no plans to visit Cuba in the future. (Tr. 49-53) Applicant exercises all 
her rights of U.S. citizenship including the right to vote. (Tr. 46-47)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
In addition to working full-time, Applicant spends her discretionary free time with 
her family and caring for her mother. (Tr. 47) She testified that her loyalty is with the 
United States as opposed to Cuba. (SOR answer; Tr. 48) She has no political or 
economic ties to Cuba and she like millions of Cubans came to the United States to 
start a new life. (SOR answer; Tr. 47-48) 
  
Cuba 
 
 Cuba is a totalitarian, communist state, now headed by General Raul Castro. 
Cuba’s totalitarian regime is a one-party system, with the Cuban Communist Party 
being the only legal political party. For the first time since 1961, the United States re-
established diplomatic relations with Cuba on July 20, 2015.  The U.S. has long had a 
broad embargo against trading with Cuba, and Americans traveling to Cuba must first 
obtain a license to engage in any travel-related transactions involving travel to, from and 
within Cuba. 
  
 According to the U.S. State Department’s current guidance on travel to Cuba, 
Cuba routinely employs repressive methods against internal dissent and monitors and 
responds to perceived threats to authority.  These methods may include physical and 
electronic surveillance, as well as detention and interrogation of both Cuban citizens 
and foreign visitors.  Human rights conditions in Cuba remain poor, as the Cuban 
government limits fundamental freedoms, including freedom of expression and peaceful 
assembly.  U.S. citizens visiting Cuba should be aware that any on-island activities may 
be subject to surveillance, and their contact with Cuban citizens monitored closely. 
   
 In recent years, the Cuban government has detained U.S. citizens it suspects of 
engaging in activities perceived to undermine state security.  U.S. citizens traveling to 
Cuba should be aware that the Cuban government may detain anyone at any time for 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
any purpose, and should not expect that Cuba’s state security or judicial systems to 
carry out their responsibilities according to international norms. 
 
 According to the State Department’s 2014 Human Rights Report on Cuba, the 
principal human rights abuses included those involving the abridgement of the ability of 
citizens to change their government and the use of government threats, extrajudicial 
physical assault, intimidation, violent government-organized counter-protests against 
peaceful dissent, and harassment and detentions to prevent free expression and 
peaceful assembly. Additional human rights abuses such as short-term, arbitrary 
unlawful detentions and arrests, selective prosecution, denial of fair trial and travel 
restrictions continue.  
 
 Authorities interfered with privacy, engaging in pervasive monitoring of private 
communications. The government also placed severe limitations on freedom of speech 
and press, restricted internet access, maintained a monopoly on media outlets, 
circumscribed academic freedom and maintained significant restrictions on the ability of 
religious groups to meet and worship. The government refused to recognize 
independent human rights groups or permit them to function legally. In addition, the 
government continued to prevent workers from forming independent unions and 
otherwise exercising their labor rights. 
 
Most human rights abuses were official acts committed at the direction of the 
government.  Impunity for the perpetrators remained widespread. Cuba has long 
targeted the United States for intensive espionage activities. Since the 1980's, there 
have been numerous reported cases of Cuban government-sanctioned and supported 
espionage against the United States. Most recently, in June 2009, a U.S. State 
Department official and his wife were arrested and indicted for conspiracy to provide 
classified information to the Cuban government. The official had access to U.S. 
Government top secret sensitive compartmented information for many years, and he 
and his wife served as clandestine agents for Cuba for 30 years, beginning in 1978.  In 
November 2009, both defendants pled guilty to spying charges and were later 
sentenced to life and 81 months, respectively.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern: 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contact with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). As a result of superseding 
events since Applicant’s SOR was issued, this concern has limited applicability given 
the fact that Applicant’s father has since passed away. However, the fact that Applicant 
has a brother and sister living in Cuba with whom she has limited contact creates a 
potential risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion 
meriting a close examination of all circumstances. 
 
 The Government produced evidence of these two disqualifying conditions under 
AGs ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and other evidence 
presented. The Government established Applicant’s brother and sister are resident 
citizens of Cuba, and that Applicant maintains some contact with them, albeit somewhat  
limited. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigating 
conditions. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
 Two foreign influence mitigating conditions under Guideline B ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applying commonsense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, and or obligation to his immediate family. ISCR 
Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Notwithstanding, Applicant has demonstrated minimum ties of 
affection for and or obligation to her brother and sister living in Cuba.  
 
Applicant’s brother is not employed by or associated with the Cuban government. 
In the case of Applicant’s sister, she is a physician presumably employed by the Cuban 
government when she was working. However, Applicant’s physician-sister has not 
worked since she took a leave of absence to care for her father before he passed away. 
The record does not identify what influence, if any, the Cuban government could exert 
on Applicant’s brother and sister as a result of their being resident citizens of Cuba. 
However, their presence in Cuba creates concerns under this Guideline. As such, the 
burden shifted to Applicant to show her relatives in Cuba do not create security risks.  
 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “Cuba,” Cuba routinely employs repressive methods 
against internal dissent and monitors and responds to perceived threats to authority.  
These methods may include physical and electronic surveillance, as well as detention 
and interrogation of both Cuban citizens and foreign visitors.   
 
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the United States and any 
foreign country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the United States was not 
challenged in this proceeding. The issue is rather a positional one. Guideline B hinges 
not on what choice Applicant might make if she is forced to choose between her loyalty 
to her family and the United States, but rather hinges on the concept that Applicant 
should not be placed in a position where she is forced to make such a choice. ISCR 
Case No. 03-15205 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005). 
 
On balance, Applicant has met her burden of showing there is little likelihood that 
her relationship with her remaining family members in Cuba could create a risk for 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
foreign influence or exploitation. Applicant’s father is no longer alive and her brother and 
sister either have no or very limited connection with the Cuban government. Applicant’s 
limited relationship with her brother and sister in Cuba do not, in all likelihood, place her 
in this position.  
 
Applicant is able to receive full credit under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b). Her brother is 
not associated with the Cuban government and her physician-sister has not returned to 
work since she went on family medical leave to care for her late father. Applicant’s 
relationship with her brother and sister in Cuba is minimal when compared and 
contrasted with her immediate relatives and extended family in the United States. 
Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [sh]e 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.” Applicant’s 
brother and sister plan to move to the United States to join their family when feasible. 
 
Applicant’s husband, children, mother, two sisters, one brother, and in-laws 
reside in the United States. Applicant has lived in the United States since 1994, and is 
fully vested in the United States. She has worked for a defense contractor since 2013. 
Applicant has substantial property and investments in the United States, and no 
property or investments in Cuba. She has embraced her life in the United States and as 
such is a loyal, dedicated, and productive U.S. citizen.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guideline B is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However further comments are warranted. 
 
Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of 
participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the nine APFs to this adjudication.1 In addition to the eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1. Ultimately, the 
clearance decision is “an overall common sense determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3. 
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; 
and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and 
personal connections to Cuba, discussed supra, which gave rise to foreign influence 
concerns.  
 
 There is significant mitigating evidence that weighs towards granting Applicant’s 
security clearance. Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1994 at age 25. 
Applicant has lived continuously in the United States for the past 22 years. The majority 
of her immediate family, to include her husband, children, mother, two brothers, and a 
sister all live in United States. Her family assets consisting of approximately $520,000 in 
the United States are substantial in contrast to having no assets in Cuba. Applicant 
became a U.S. citizen in 2007, has a U.S. passport, and exercises her right to vote in 
the United States.  
 
Applicant maintains much more frequent contact with her U.S.-based family 
members than she does with her brother and sister residing in Cuba. Her ties to the 
United States are far stronger than her ties to two siblings in Cuba. There is no 
evidence Applicant has ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the 
United States. She takes her loyalty to the United States very seriously, and she has 
worked diligently contributing to the national defense since 2013. The evidence contains 
no derogatory record evidence about the Applicant. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Cuba. Cuba and the United 
States have an evolving relationship that continues to improve. In the unlikely event that 
Applicant’s brother or sister in Cuba were subjected to coercion or duress from the 
Cuban government, I find that because of her deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States, that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the United States. 
 
 This case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
                                                          
1
 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole-person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
under the facts presented that Applicant may have divided loyalties or act in a way 
adverse to U.S. interests or some attempt may be made to exploit Applicant’s family 
members in such a way that this U.S. citizen would have to choose between his 
pledged loyalty to the United States and those family members. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and circumstances, in the context of 
the whole-person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns pertaining to 
foreign influence.   
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set 
forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of 
the whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is eligible for access to 
classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
