1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 15-02385 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CERVI, GREGG A., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial concerns. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
granted.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
July 28, 2014. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) on November 2, 2015, detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known 
as a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
2 The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Directive 5200.2R, Personnel Security 
Regulations (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 24, 2015, and included a letter of 
explanation. She elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, known as the File 
of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel on January 20, 
2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections to the proposed evidence, and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 3, 2016, and submitted an undated letter and several documents in response, 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F and admitted into evidence. She did not 
assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
July 1, 2016. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 through 6) are 
admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2014. She is a technical school graduate. She is unmarried 
and lives with her widowed mother. 
 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts. Applicant admitted to the debts and 
explained that a former fiancé was permitted to use her credit cards and in 2013, 
accumulated charges that she did not authorize. She was also forced to leave an 
apartment that she shared with him because of violent behavior toward her and her 
mother. One debt involved payments for a television that he stole from her, and others 
were for women’s clothing that she did not receive. She reported the theft to the police 
and disclosed the situation to her employer and on her SF 86. Despite promises from 
her former fiancé, he never paid for the charges for which he was responsible. 
 
 Since 2013, Applicant has been paying the debts and has resolved all but one 
small medical debt for which she is unable to locate the creditor (SOR ¶ 1.g). Despite 
additional expenses resulting from the loss of her father in January 2015, the remaining 
debts have been settled and paid over time, ending in March 2016. Applicant has 
expressed embarrassment for the debts her personal situation has caused, and 
believes she learned a lesson from this experience. She stated that prior to this 
relationship, she never broke an apartment lease and paid her bills on-time. She and 
her mother share living expenses and her latest credit report does not reflect any further 
financial distress. 
 
Policies 
 
  Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
 
3 
 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
4 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a history of financial problems, and had debts she was unable or 
unwilling to resolve. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control: and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  There is sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial problems 
have been resolved. She suffered a financial impact from an abusive relationship that 
has ended. She made significant efforts to address her debts, and eventually resolved 
the delinquencies in a satisfactory manner. I find that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances once she was financially stable. 
 
 Applicant demonstrated that she has gained control of her financial situation, 
and her overall efforts to address her debts showed a clear intent to resolve them. She 
has a steady work history and her financial issues no longer cast doubts on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Overall, I find that the financial 
considerations concerns have been mitigated. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c), and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
5 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings 
of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Overall, I find 
that the financial concerns have been mitigated. I have no questions or concerns about 
her overall ability and willingness to fully face her financial responsibilities, and her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
  Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
