 
1 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-00644 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 7, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 21, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 2, 2015. He answered 
the SOR on September 18, 2015, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 10, 2015, and I 
received the case assignment on November 12, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on November 18, 2015, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on December 9, 2015. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits A through D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 16, 2015. I granted Applicant’s request 
to keep the record open until December 23, 2015, to submit additional matters. 
Applicant did not submit additional evidence. The record closed on December 23, 2015. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d through 1.g of the SOR, with explanations. He denied 
the factual allegations in Subparagraph 1.c of the SOR. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant is 57 years old, has a masters’ degree, and works for a defense 
contractor. He has worked there since 2004. He has been married and divorced twice. 
He has three children of his own. The youngest child lives with him now. Applicant lives 
in the home that is the subject of the mortgage referred to in Subparagraph 1.a. His 
salary is $123,000. Applicant served 16 years in the U.S. Air Force, but does not 
receive a pension from his service. (Tr. 15, 16, 18 35; Exhibits 1, A)  
 
 Applicant owes seven delinquent debts totaling $21,973. He admits all but one 
debt, claiming that debt is to be paid by his former wife. (Tr. 25; Exhibits 2-7) 
 
 Applicant claims his mortgage account is current (Subparagraph 1.a). The unpaid 
arrearages were $6,923 on a balance of $207,164. He testified he brought the debt 
current by refinancing his pickup truck. It was brought current in November 2015. 
Applicant stated that in the past his mortgage lender let him get behind in payments and 
then get caught up by paying market rates. He was paying medical bills, property taxes, 
and “other big ticket items that I needed money for at that particular moment.” The credit 
report of November 2015 shows the mortgage payments were delinquent every month 
until at least September 2015. This debt is resolved. It is the only debt resolved owed by 
Applicant of the seven alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 16, 17, 22; Exhibits 2-5, D)  
 
 Applicant owes $7,426 to a debt collector, supposedly being paid by garnishment 
to satisfy a judgment obtained against Applicant by the debt collector (Subparagraph 
1.b). Applicant did not submit a copy of any judgment or a copy of his pay statement 
showing any garnishment. Applicant testified he told the creditor he would try to “work 
something out with them as I could.”Applicant did not take action to address the debt, 
because he did not want to make monthly payments. He claims he had a line of credit 
he used to pay his property taxes when he was short of cash. Finally, the lender did not 
allow him to use the remaining $1,500 to pay his taxes one year. He stopped making 
payments to this lender in about 2010. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 23-25, 33, 34; 
Exhibits 2-5, C) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owes $2,688 on a credit card (Subparagraph 1.c). He claims the debt is 
not owed by him, but admits at the hearing it is a joint account with his second ex-wife. 
He testified, “I believe that it was paid off, but I just don’t have any proof of it. That is 
why I need to validate it.” It appears on all his credit reports as his financial obligation. It 
became delinquent in 2013. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 25, 26; Exhibits 2-5)  
 
 Applicant owes a bank $2,418 that remains unpaid since 2009 (Subparagraph 
1.d). He admits the debt, but claims he wants to wait for a lawsuit against him by a debt 
collector to be settled and then pay this debt. He submitted an exhibit that a lawsuit filed 
in 2014 by the collection company is closed as of September 2015. The only action 
Applicant has taken to try to resolve his debts is to retain a credit repair company to 
attempt to verify the negative entries appearing on his credit reports. He did not submit 
any proof that any of the debts in the SOR have been resolved by him or that company. 
He claims he does not know whom to pay on this unresolved debt. (Tr. 26; Exhibits 2-5, 
C) 
 
 Applicant owes $1,230 (Subparagraph 1.e). He admits he owes the money but 
has not established a payment plan, preferring to let his contracted credit repair 
company arrange a plan after they “validate” the amount owed. This debt arose from an 
on-line payment company charge account. He has not made any payments on this 
account. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 26, 27; Exhibits 3-5) 
 
 Applicant owes a bank $1,121 (Subparagraph 1.f). He admits the debt is not paid 
and he heard from the collection agency about two weeks before the hearing. This debt 
became delinquent in 2011. The debt is unresolved. (Tr. 27, 35; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant owes a mail order organization $167 (Subparagraph 1.g). This account 
was opened in 1999 and the last payment was in 2008. Applicant testified he does not 
know how old the account is. It is unresolved. (Tr. 27, 28; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant had $4 in savings as of the date of the hearing. His checking account 
was in deficit $1,200 as allowed by the bank to a limit of minus $1,500 until it is 
replenished with his automatic pay deposit. He is paid every two weeks and each 
payment is $3,300. (Tr. 28)   
 
 Applicant claims his debts became delinquent in 2010 when his second wife lost 
her job and they could not make payments on all the debts they incurred while having 
two incomes. (Tr. 18, 19; Exhibits 2-7, A) 
 
 Applicant signed up for credit counseling and repair the day prior to the hearing. 
He was interviewed by the government investigator about his debts in May 2012 and 
the SOR was issued in August 2015, but Applicant claims he was researching his debts 
and what to do about paying them and did not have time to address them earlier than 
December 2015. His written statement states that it will take six to eight months to 
confirm the debts he owes and establish payment plans. He has one loan for $4,000 
from his retirement account for his daughter’s education. Applicant took out a student 
 
4 
 
 
loan for his daughter’s education for $20,000. It is delinquent since 2012. His written 
statement declares he will take out another loan in mid-2016 and possibly sell his horse 
trailer, farm tractor, and farm implements. Applicant testified he used to train and show 
horses at riding events until 2006. (Tr. 19, 20, 30; Exhibits 2, A and B) 
 
 Applicant’s statements in 2006 to a government investigator and in 1999 discuss 
his financial difficulties prior to those interviews. He admitted in them that he had 
financial problems for a number of years and filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1996. His 
financial problems, according to these two statements, seemed to have started when he 
was discharged from the Air Force as a major because he did not think he could be 
promoted to lieutenant colonel. He received an honorable discharge and a lump sum 
payment of $80,000. He was divorced from his first wife in 1992. He owed child support 
of about $7,000 according to his 1999 statement when their daughter decided to live 
with her mother. His daughter is now an adult and no child support is owed. Applicant’s 
second wife joined the U.S. Army as an enlisted person. While she was being trained, 
Applicant moved with her and was unemployed from June 1995 to October 1997. He 
has been employed since then. (Exhibits 6, 7) 
 
 Applicant stated in his written exhibit that he has had security clearances since 
1979 in the Air Force and afterward. He has never had a security problem. (Exhibit A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $21,973 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. This amount includes arrearages on his monthly mortgage 
payment. His mortgage balance when the SOR was issued was $207,164. Applicant 
 
6 
 
 
has seven delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The evidence raises all of the above 
security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted  responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 No mitigating condition is established by Applicant Applicant’s financial difficulties 
are recent, dating from 1996 to the present. The SOR list of delinquent debts dates from 
2008. He has not resolved any debts so they are not infrequent. The circumstances 
leading the accumulation of his debts are not unusual. AG ¶ 20 (a) is not established.  
 
 The financial problems were not incurred beyond Applicant’s control and there is 
no evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20 (b) is not 
established. 
 
Applicant is not paying his debts in an orderly manner. Applicant contracted with 
a debt service company about a month prior to the hearing. There is no evidence that 
this organization has resolved any of his debts or any meaningful financial counseling 
intending to aid him in resolving his delinquent debts. He has $4 in savings and a 
negative balance in his checking account of $1,200 while earning $6,600 monthly after 
 
7 
 
 
taxes. There are no clear indications from the evidence he presented that the financial 
problems are under control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) is not established.  
 
Applicant has not addressed any SOR debts, except for his delinquent mortgage 
account, but only after the SOR was issued. He testified he will pay them in the future 
when one collection action is “settled,” but admits he procrastinates on doing that 
action. Applicant has a history of poor financial management according to his own 
statements. AG ¶ 20 (d) is not established because Applicant has not made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his debts. A promise to pay debts in the future is not evidence of a 
good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant did not present any evidence that he has a reasonable basis to dispute 
the debts listed in the SOR. In fact, he admits most of them. AG ¶ 20 (e) is not 
established. 
 
There is no affluence at issue in this case, so AG ¶ 20 (f) is not established nor is 
it relevant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant demonstrated he has a 
long history from 1996 to the present of not being able to manage his finances. He 
incurs debt and does not repay it. He has $4 in savings on a $123,000 annual salary, 
and a negative balance in his checking account. He does not know where he spends his 
money; consequently he has no idea how to manage it properly. There are no 
permanent behavioral changes by Applicant regarding management of his finances. He 
 
8 
 
 
procrastinates for years in paying debts, and then, with his clearance in jeopardy, hires 
a credit repair company to “validate” his debts. He failed to establish that financial 
issues will not recur. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress to 
occur in his life exists because of his chronic inability to pay his delinquent debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
