 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00443 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by the delinquent debts she incurred 
during a bad marriage that ended in divorce. She started addressing her financial 
situation after separating from her former husband three years ago. She documented 
her action in addressing her debts. She paid some debts in full, is paying others through 
agreed-upon payment plans, and manages her present finances in a responsible 
manner. She met her burden of persuasion for continued access to classified 
information. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On September 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
her circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish her 
continued eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
 
 On March 21, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice scheduling the hearing for April 26, 2016.2 The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Applicant testified and called two witnesses as references. I admitted, 
without objection, Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 4 and Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.) A – O. 
The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received by DOHA on May 6, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in her early forties. She married in 1999, shortly after graduating from 
college. She went to graduate school, but did not complete the course of studies for a 
degree due to family commitments. She had two children during the marriage. She has 
been employed as a federal contractor since 2001, and held a clearance since 2004. 
She is a lead helpdesk technician and has been with her current employer since 2009.  
 
Applicant and her former spouse had a tumultuous relationship, which was 
exacerbated in the final years of their marriage by long stretches of unemployment and 
underemployment that her former spouse experienced. Applicant left the marriage 
about three years ago, when her former spouse threatened her with physical violence.  
 
After separating from her former husband, Applicant moved in with her parents to 
reduce her expenses. She stopped living off credit cards, stabilized her finances, and 
started addressing her past-due debts. During the course of the present security 
clearance reinvestigation, Applicant uncovered that her former spouse, who had been 
responsible for filing and paying their taxes, had failed to do so. She contacted the IRS, 
negotiated an installment agreement, and presented documentation of paying per the 
terms of the agreement. She is in the process of resolving her overdue tax filings. 
Applicant disclosed her adverse financial history on her security clearance application.  
 
Applicant also presented evidence documenting the steps she has taken to 
resolve her largest outstanding SOR debts for student loans she incurred for graduate 
school. She did not have student loan debt for college, as she paid for her 
undergraduate degree through scholarships, part-time work, and financial assistance 
from her parents. She also documented paying other debts, both those alleged in the 
SOR and non-SOR debt. A large portion of her outstanding debt is related to medical 
care for herself and her children.  
 
Applicant received financial counseling. She uses an excel spreadsheet to 
manage her finances. She presented documentation of timely paying her recurring 
monthly expenses and automatic deductions into a savings account. She recently 
started contributing to her employer-sponsored 401(k) account. She has approximately 
$200 in monthly disposable income to pay unanticipated expenses.   
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 Prehearing scheduling correspondence, the notice of hearing, and case management order are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s divorce was finalized this past year. Following their separation, 
Applicant’s former husband did not provide consistent financial support for their 
children. He was found liable for child support arrears totaling over $10,000. Applicant 
filed the proper paperwork and is now receiving $800 in child support through court-
ordered garnishment.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a 
consideration of whether an individual with financial problems might be tempted 
to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their 
debts. It also addresses the extent to which an individual’s delinquent debts cast 
doubt upon their judgment, self-control, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information.3 
 
The SOR alleges delinquent student loans (1.a – 1.d and 1.m); past-due medical 
accounts (1.e-1.i, 1.k, and 1.l), and an overdue phone and library account (1.j and 1.n). 
These debts total about $60,000, with nearly $55,000 of that amount attributable to the 
student loans Applicant incurred for graduate school. Applicant’s accumulation of 
delinquent debt raises the financial considerations security concern and, specifically, the 
disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” 
and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems stem, in large part, from a bad marriage and lack 
of financial support while raising two children on her own over the past three years. 
Notwithstanding these circumstances, Applicant took responsible action to address her 
financial situation. After separating from her former husband three years ago, Applicant 
reduced her expenses and has methodically and systematically addressed her 
delinquent debts. Notably, she contacted the IRS, negotiated an installment agreement, 
and presented documentation of a track record of debt payments. She responsibly 
addressed her student loan debt by submitting the necessary paperwork to consolidate 
her loans and to establish a reasonable repayment plan.4 She also satisfied or is paying 
other debts that she became aware of through the background investigation. 
 
 Although some debts remain, Applicant is living within her means and addressing 
her debts as her finances allow. The remaining SOR debts do not undercut the 
significant efforts she has made in the past three years to take control of her finances 
and satisfy her debts. Furthermore, Applicant’s demonstrated track record of debt 
repayment and the manner in which she currently manages her finances provides a 
reasonable degree of certainty that she will continue to manage her finances in the 
manner expected of clearance holders.5 AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.6 Applicant met her burden. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been upfront and candid about her past financial trouble throughout the course of 
the current background investigation. Her financial situation was not the result of poor 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case 11-09258 (App. Bd. Sep. 3, 2013) (judge erred in relying on lack of results in resolving 
delinquent loan, instead of examining applicant’s efforts in resolving indebtedness, which would provide 
meaningful context in assessing applicant’s security clearance suitability).  
 
5 ISCR Case 14-00504 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014) (adverse decision reversed because, notwithstanding the 
lack of corroboration regarding the resolution of some SOR debts, applicant removed concerns about her 
security clearance suitability by documented efforts to resolve her delinquent debts).  
 
6 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Rather, 
her financial situation grew out of poor personal choices she made when she was 
younger. However, she has matured greatly over the past three years and has taken 
control over of all aspects of her life, including her finances. She formulated a plan to 
resolve her financial situation and implemented it. In short, Applicant mitigated security 
concerns raised by the accumulation of past-due debts during her former marriage. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
