 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-01451   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 26, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on nine debts in the total amount of 
$99,535. He failed to resolve any of them. He did not meet his burden to establish 
mitigation. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 13, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 1, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
on March 16, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 17, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on June 2, 2016. The record was left open for Applicant to submit 
additional exhibits. Applicant presented additional exhibits on May 23, 2016, marked AE 
A through AE D. Department Counsel had no objections to AE A through AE D, and 
they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He has worked for a government contractor since 
2012. He served in the Navy for 20 years and retired at paygrade E-4. He is married 
and has four adult children and three adult stepchildren. (Tr. 18, 38.)  
  
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent in repaying nine debts, in the total 
amount of $99,535. In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.f. He denied SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. His debts are documented in the record credit 
reports dated October 3, 2012; January 28, 2015; and January 19, 2016. (GEs 2 
through 4.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent accounts to his 2007 move. He transferred his 
job from one state to another state with a higher cost of living. Three months after the 
transfer, his company shut down the branch in which he worked. He also listed 
unemployment from September 2011 to January 2012. (GE 1; Tr. 17-20.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent second mortgage in the amount of $79,566, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. This debt has been delinquent since at least 2014. Applicant 
purchased a house for approximately $524,000 in 2007 and financed the purchase with 
two loans. At the time Applicant purchased the home, the monthly payments were 
$1,000 more than he could afford to pay. He believed his family would help him pay the 
difference. They did not. He is current with his payments on his first mortgage, but is not 
paying on the second mortgage. In his post-hearing documentation, Applicant submitted 
a letter addressed to each of the credit reporting agencies, disputing this debt because 
he believed it to be “over seven years.” This debt is not resolved. (GE 3; AE B; Tr. 22-
25, 42-44.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a mortgage loan in the amount of $1,847, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. This debt has been delinquent since 2009. Applicant testified this debt 
represents the amount that was past due on a total mortgage of approximately $43,000. 
Applicant testified that the property securing this loan was foreclosed upon. He admitted 
he owes this lender approximately $43,000. He has not had contact with this lender. 
Applicant denied this debt because it “exceeded the statute of limitations” for collection. 
In his post-hearing documentation, Applicant submitted a letter addressed to each of the 
 
 
3 
 
 
credit reporting agencies, disputing this debt because he believed it to be “over seven 
years.” This debt is not resolved. (GE 3; GE 4; AE B; AE D; Tr. 39-42.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off debt in the amount of $5,251, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt has been delinquent since 2008. Applicant disputed this debt with 
the credit reporting bureaus and it is no longer being reported on his credit file, 
according to a letter from Equifax. However, the absence of an entry on his credit report 
does not mean Applicant resolve this debt. It is unresolved. (GE 3; AE D.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $4,964, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt has been delinquent since 2009. This debt is not resolved. (GE 
2; GE 3;  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $4,243, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt has been delinquent since 2012. This debt is not resolved. (GE 
2; GE 3.)  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent cell phone account in the amount of 
$1,758, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt has been delinquent since 2014. This debt is 
not resolved. (GE 3; Tr. 37-38.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $1,642, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt has been delinquent since 2009. This debt is not resolved.  (GE 
2; GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $886, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. This debt has been delinquent since at least 2012. Applicant’s May 2016 
credit report, AE D, reflected a delinquent balance of $877 with a note that “customer 
disputes after resolution.” Applicant testified he was attempting to reach a payment 
agreement with this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (GE 2; GE 4; AE D; Tr. 37.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $412, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt has been delinquent since 2012. This debt is not resolved. (GE 2; 
Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 Applicant has not paid any of the debts alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 27.) His budget 
reflects that he spends more than his income each month. (AE C.) He testified that he 
has sought financial counseling, which encouraged him to dispute his old debts based 
on the statute of limitations. (Tr. 17-18, 27-28, 34-36.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on nine debts in the total amount of 
$99,535. Many of those accounts have been delinquent for more than seven years. He 
failed to establish that he has resolved any of them, and his budget reflected insufficient 
income to permit him to do so if he so desired. The evidence raises security concerns 
under the above conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
 
6 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are recent. He has documented few actions on his 
delinquencies, other than to contest some debts for exceeding the statute of limitations. 
His testimony shows that he has not prioritized repaying his delinquent debt, and he has 
not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant blamed his financial problems on unemployment and buying a home he 
could not afford. Unemployment is, in part, a situation which was beyond Applicant’s 
control. However, he did control his decision to purchase a home he could not afford. 
Further, he did not address his debts in a responsible or timely manner. Mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(b) has not been fully established. 
 
 Applicant testified he participated in financial counseling. However, there are no 
clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. His 
financial counseling only resulted in him contesting some debts due to their age. 
Further, he produced no documentation to establish a good-faith effort to resolve his 
debts. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided any evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. While he contested 
several of his debts with the credit bureaus due to their age, he largely admitted owing 
the underlying debts. Simply filing a dispute with a credit reporting agency does not 
provide evidence of mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) where Applicant admits to the 
underlying financial obligation, without a more concrete reason for a dispute. Mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(e) has not been fully established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has been a dedicated employee since 2012. He served honorably in the Navy 
for 20 years. However, he is a mature adult and responsible for his choices and 
financial obligations. His financial decisions reflect that he lacks the responsibility, 
judgment, and trustworthiness required to hold a security clearance. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
