1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-01442 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 13 delinquent debts, totaling 
$55,026. In March 2016, her nonpriority unsecured debts, including all SOR debts, were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. She intentionally failed to disclose 
her delinquent debts on her July 27, 2012 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SCA). She falsely denied having 
any work-related reprimands and suspensions in the past seven years on her SCA. 
Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct 
security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On July 27, 2012, Applicant signed and submitted her SCA. (GE 1) On 
November 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 08/23/2016
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant, and it recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether her clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
On December 29, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 6, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On May 24, 2016, the case was assigned 
to me. On June 6, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, setting the hearing for June 20, 2016. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1) 
Applicant waived her right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of her 
hearing. (Tr. 15-16) Her hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
six exhibits; and all exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 19-24; Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1-4; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-F) On June 27, 2016, DOHA received a copy 
of the transcript of the hearing. The record was held open for additional evidence until 
July 22, 2016. (Tr. 74, 85, 87-88) On July 22, 2016, Applicant’s provided one post-
hearing document, and it was admitted without objection. (AE G) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant made some admissions about facts 
underlying the allegations. (HE 3) Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 51 years old, and she has been employed by a government 
contractor for 16 years. (Tr. 26; GE 1) She provides physical security for a government 
department. (Tr. 8-9, 26; GE 1) In 1989, she received her general educational diploma 
(GED) and joined the Army. (Tr. 6-7) She has earned 39 college credits. (Tr. 6) She 
completed four years of Army active service and four years of Army reserve service. (Tr. 
7) Her military occupational specialty (MOS) was supply specialist (97Y). (Tr. 8) She left 
active duty as a specialist (E-4), and she received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 8) She 
has never married, and she does not have any children. (Tr. 85) Applicant seeks 
continuation of her security clearance to maintain her employment. (Tr. 27-28)  
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant’s SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts, totaling $55,026. The SOR alleges 
the following debts: four bank or bank credit card debts for $15,628 (SOR ¶ 1.a), $3,611 
(SOR ¶ 1.c), $960 (SOR ¶ 1.f), and $10,556 (SOR ¶ 1.j); four store debts for $4,252 
(SOR ¶ 1.b), $5,170 (SOR ¶ 1.k), $1,255 (SOR ¶ 1.l), and $937 (SOR ¶ 1.m); two debts 
of unspecified origin were placed for collection for $1,509 (SOR ¶ 1.d), and $1,357 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(SOR ¶ 1.e); and three judgments were entered in 2013 of unspecified origin for $1,957 
(SOR ¶ 1.g), $6,080 (SOR ¶ 1.h), and $1,754 (SOR ¶ 1.i).  
 
  In 2012, Applicant said she paid the first debt consolidation company $200 
monthly; however, it went out of business. (Tr. 38-39, 73) I held the record open for her 
to provide proof of the payments to the first debt consolidation company; however, she 
did not provide proof of any payments. (Tr. 74, 77-78) From November 2012 to 
September 2013, Applicant made $305 monthly payments to the second debt 
consolidation program. (AE G) The second debt consolidation company made some 
payments to her creditors. (AE G) She decided to utilize a different debt consolidation 
program, and she said she paid the third debt consolidation company $200 monthly for 
“at least a year and maybe more.” (Tr. 33-36; AE B) She was advised that it would take 
a long time to resolve her debts, and her advisor recommended that she utilize 
bankruptcy. (Tr. 38) 
 
Applicant admitted she owed debts to the creditors in the SOR. (SOR response) 
In December 2015, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code. (Tr. 28; AE A; SOR response) She listed all of the SOR debts in her bankruptcy 
filing. (Tr. 29, 53-54) Her nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged in March 2016. 
(Tr. 29) She received financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. (SOR 
response) 
 
Applicant’s monthly pay after deductions is $3,000 to $3,500. (Tr. 42-43) Her 
monthly apartment rent is $1,492. (Tr. 43) In April 2016, she purchased a Toyota sport 
utility vehicle, and her monthly payment is $488. (Tr. 45-46) Her monthly payment for 
vehicle insurance is $129. (Tr. 46) She has substantial additional expenses. (Tr. 46-52) 
She did not indicate her total monthly expenses or her monthly remainder after paying 
all of her expenses. She does not own any credit cards. (Tr. 56) She filed her federal 
income tax return for 2015. (Tr. 56) She is making $50 monthly payments to her state 
tax authority for a $300 income tax debt from 2015. (Tr. 57-59) She does not owe any 
other income taxes. (Tr. 59-60) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Section 26 of Applicant’s July 27, 2012 SCA asked Applicant the following four 
questions about her delinquent debts: “In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had a 
judgment entered against you?”; “Are you currently delinquent on any debt?”; “In the 
past seven (7) years, [have] you defaulted on any type of loan”; and “In the past 
seven (7) years, [have you been] over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously 
entered?” Applicant answered “No” to all of these questions. She did not disclose any 
delinquent debts on her SCA. 
 
Applicant’s July 31, 2012 combined credit report shows nine delinquent accounts 
as follows: (1) the charged-off debt in SOR ¶ 1.j for $10,556 with delinquencies in the 
first three months of 2012; (2) the charged-off debt in SOR ¶ 1.a for $15,628 and 120 
days past due; (3) the charged-off debt in SOR ¶ 1.c for $3,636 and 180 days past due;  
(4) the collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.b for $4,252 and 150 days past due; (5) the collection 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
debt in SOR ¶ 1.h for $6,285 was transferred from a bank and was delinquent for an 
unspecified period of time; (6) the collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.i for $1,734 was 
transferred from a bank and was delinquent for an unspecified period of time; (7) the 
collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.e for $1,391 was transferred from a bank and was delinquent 
for an unspecified period of time; (8) the collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for $1,509 was 
transferred from a bank and was delinquent for an unspecified period of time; and (9) 
the charged-off debt in SOR ¶ 1.k for $2,095 was transferred from a bank and was 
delinquent for an unspecified period of time. (GE 3) 
 
There is no evidence of judgments entered against Applicant when she 
completed her July 27, 2012 SCA. The three judgements alleged in the SOR were 
entered in 2013. (GE 4)  
 
An October 10, 2012, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI) states:  
 
When filling out her SF-86 case papers, the subject originally answered no 
to all financial questions. When asked to confirm her response, she 
confirmed all original responses of no. She added that on an unrecalled 
date in approximately 2010 or 2011 she consolidated all of her loans. Her 
overall financial situation is good. She contacted [first debt consolidation 
company] to consolidate all of her loans, which were at the moment on 
time. She awarded [first debt consolidation company] an initial payment of 
$970 or $980 and [first debt consolidation company] would consolidate all 
of her loans.  
 
(GE 2) After additional commentary to the OPM investigator about how she was making 
payments to the first debt consolidation company, the OPM investigator confronted 
Applicant with most of the delinquent debts listed in her SOR. (GE 2) She said she did 
not list several of the delinquent accounts on her SCA because they were in good 
standing when she sought assistance from the first debt consolidation company, and 
she believed the accounts were being managed by the first debt consolidation 
company. (GE 2) She did not recognize several of the collection companies that were 
seeking resolution of delinquent debts. (GE 2)  
 
 At her hearing, Applicant explained that she intentionally caused her accounts to 
become delinquent because that enabled the accounts to become part of her debt 
consolidation program. (Tr. 61, 70) She said, “I thought they were talking about 
delinquency stuff that, you know, I just didn’t pay. No. The accounts were good.” (Tr. 61) 
She wanted to tell the OPM interviewer “the reason why they were delinquent. I made 
them delinquent.” (Tr. 62) 
 
 Section 13A of Applicant’s July 12, 2012 SCA asked Applicant about disciplinary 
actions during her current employment, “in the last seven (7) years have received a 
written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in 
the workplace, such as a violation of security policy?” (GE 1) Applicant answered, “No” 
to this question. (Tr. 64; GE 1)  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges that from December 2007 through December 2011, 
Applicant had 20 negative documents in her personnel file. She received 10 letters of 
reprimand, mostly for not being at work for a non-medical reason or being late to work 
and seven suspensions from work. She was suspended from work on the following 
dates: on March 14, 2009 for two days; on December 8, 2009, for one day; on April 24, 
2010, for two days; on May 11, 2010, for two days; on October 4, 2010, for one day; on 
November 4, 2010, for two days; and on December 12, 2011, for five days.  
 
 Applicant admitted that she received reprimands for not being at work. (Tr. 64) 
She said she thought the question was asking about reprimands for security mistakes or 
errors. (Tr. 64, 67, 71-72, 78, 82-83) Also, she contended the reprimands were actually 
acknowledgements. (Tr. 67) She said she was unsure about her suspensions because 
she did not look in her personnel file. (Tr. 66) She said there were three types of 
administrative discipline: acknowledgements; reprimands; and memorandum for record. 
(Tr. 69) She admitted she had a reprimand and a suspension, and employees are told 
when they are suspended. (Tr. 69, 76) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has tasked Agency heads with the responsibility to maintain “an 
effective program to ensure that access to classified information by each employee is 
clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.” Exec. Or. 12968, Access to 
Classified Information, Section 1.2(b).  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common sense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be in terms of national security and access to 
classified information is limited to applicants “whose personal and professional history 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
affirmatively indicates loyalty to the United States, strength of character, 
trustworthiness, honesty, reliability, discretion, and sound judgment, as well as freedom 
from conflicting allegiances and potential for coercion, and willingness and ability to 
abide by regulations governing the use, handling, and protection of classified 
information.” Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports, OPM PSI, SOR response, hearing transcript, and bankruptcy records. 
Several of Applicant’s debts became delinquent in 2012. The record establishes 13 
delinquent debts, totaling $55,026. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
           
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
  Applicant’s conduct in resolving her debts warrants full application of AG ¶ 20(c). 
She received financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. All of her 
nonpriority unsecured debts, including all SOR debts, were discharged in March 2016 
under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. There are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. She understands what she must do to establish and 
maintain her financial responsibility. Her delinquent SOR debts do not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Her efforts are sufficient to fully 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.   
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsification of her On July 27, 2012 SCA used 
to process the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.2 
 
Section 26 of Applicant’s July 27, 2012 SCA asked Applicant the following three 
relevant questions about her delinquent debts: Are you currently delinquent on any 
debt?”; “In the past seven (7) years, [have] you defaulted on any type of loan”; and “In 
the past seven (7) years, [have you been] over 120 days delinquent on any debt not 
previously entered?”3 Applicant answered “No” to all of these questions.  
 
Applicant was well aware that she had debts meeting the criteria of being over 
120 days delinquent in the previous seven years and currently delinquent. She said she 
deliberately caused them to become delinquent. Moreover, when she started the first 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
3The allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b that she failed to disclose a judgment in the previous seven years is 
unsubstantiated because the three judgments alleged in the SOR were entered against her after she 
signed her SCA. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
debt consolidation program, she knew that this program would not immediately bring all 
of her debts to current status. Her explanation at her hearing for not disclosing her 
delinquent debts on her July 27, 2012 SCA is not credible. 
 
Section 13A of Applicant’s July 27, 2012 SCA sought information from Applicant 
about whether she received adverse employment documentation, asking “in the last 
seven (7) years have received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, 
suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such as a violation of 
security policy?” (GE 1) Applicant answered, “No” to this question. (Tr. 64; GE 1)  
 
From December 2007 through December 2011, Applicant received 10 letters of 
reprimand, mostly for not being at work for a non-medical reason or being late to work 
and seven suspensions from work. Her claim that she believed the question was limited 
to security-related reprimands and suspensions is not credible. While she may not have 
known how many reprimands and suspensions she received, she knew that she 
received at least one of each, during the previous seven years. She intentionally 
provided false information when she denied that she received work-related reprimands 
and suspensions on her July 27, 2012 SCA.  
 
Applicant understood that the DOD was seeking specific derogatory or negative 
financial information about her history of delinquent debt and information about work-
related problems. She knowingly and intentionally chose to deny that she had 
delinquent debts and adverse employment information. AG ¶ 16(a) is established.     
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant deliberately and improperly provided false information in her July 27, 
2012 SCA. Her falsification of her SCA by denying negative financial information and 
work-related reprimands and suspensions was improper and raised a serious security 
concern. No mitigating conditions apply. Guideline E concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 51 years old, and she has been employed by a government 
contractor for 16 years. She provides physical security for a government department. 
She has earned 39 college credits. She completed four years of Army active service 
and four years of Army reserve service. She left active duty as a specialist, and she 
received an honorable discharge. She does not have any reportable criminal offenses, 
illegal drug use, or alcohol abuse. She is sufficiently mature to understand and comply 
with her security responsibilities.    
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In March 2016, Applicant’s nonpriority unsecured debts, including all SOR debts, 
were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. She completed financial 
counseling. Her bankruptcy has provided Applicant a fresh financial start. Applicant is 
an intelligent, mature person, and she understands what she needs to do to establish 
and maintain her financial responsibility.   
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about her delinquent debts in 
the previous seven years and her work-related reprimands and suspensions in the past 
seven years on her July 27, 2012 SCA. Her explanation for denying that she had 
delinquent debts in Section 26 of her SCA and her claim that she believed the question 
in Section 13A of her SCA was limited to information about security-related reprimands 
and suspensions are not credible. The protection of national security requires that those 
entrusted with access to classified information self-report derogatory information. 
Should a security violation occur, security clearance holders with knowledge of the facts 
must be sufficiently reliable and responsible to disclose the security violation, even if it 
reflects poorly on the security clearance holder. Applicant’s failure to disclose facts on 
her July 27, 2012 SCA raises unresolved questions about her reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated personal conduct 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant or continuation of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct security concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
