                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
------------------------------------- )          ADP Case No. 15-00094   
                           )                                                          
                                                          )
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated trust concerns regarding her past drug use but did not mitigate trust concerns
regarding her finances. Eligibility for holding a public trust position is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On August 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should
be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865 (E.O. 10855), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
1.  A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security,
titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,” covering the handling of trustworthiness cases under the
Directive was issued on November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed  DOHA to continue to utilize DOD
Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations (to include those involving ADP
I, II. and III positions). (HE 1) Parenthetically, the Directive was designed to implement E.O. 10865.
2
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 29, 2015, and requested a
hearing. This case was assigned to me on April 1, 2016. The case was scheduled for
hearing on May 25, 2016. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s application for eligibility to hold a public trust
position. At the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4);
Applicant relied on the one witness (herself) and three exhibits. (AEs A-C) the transcript
was received on June 2, 2016. 
Procedural Issues
Before the closing of the hearing, Applicant requested the record by kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with a signed rehabilitation
agreement and documented payments to the student loan creditor covered by  ¶ ¶ 1.a-
1.c, 1.g., and 1.i, and verification of payments made to creditors 1.h and 1.j. 
For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the
record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond. Applicant did not
furnish any post-hearing submissions. 
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated six delinquent
Department of Education (DOE) student loans exceeding $10,000; (b) accrued a
delinquent student loan debt with her private educational institution; and (c)
accumulated two other delinquent debts: one with a financial institution covered by ¶
1.h and one with her landlord covered by ¶ 1.j. Allegedly, these debts remain
outstanding. 
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) used marijuana from August 2007 to
at least July 2011; (b) purchased marijuana from friends from April 2009 to at least
February 2011; (c) was arrested in June 2011 and charged with marijuana
possession/use and paraphernalia possession/use; and (d) tested positive for
marijuana on a court ordered drug test screening in April 2011.  
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the individual DOE student
loan debts, claiming they were all part of the same loan. She denied the creditor 1.j
3
debt, claiming she settled the $720 balance owed by her roommate at the time. She
admitted the debts covered by ¶¶ 1.d and 1.h.  
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 36-year-old military service representative for a medical health
group who seeks eligibility to hold a public trust position. The allegations covered in the
SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant has never married and has no children.  She attended college classes
at a local art institute between April 2009 and March 2011, but claimed no degree or
diploma. (GE 1)  Applicant claimed no military service. 
Applicant accepted employment with her current employer in May 2014. (Tr. 32)
In her service representative position, she has serviced over 20,000 calls, offering
assistance to beneficiaries and providers with questions regarding their medical
coverage. (Tr. 32) She is often utilized as a mentor for new-member hires and on-the-
job training and coaching. She was unemployed between February 2014 and May
2014. (GE 1) She was employed by another government contractor between October
2013 and February 2014, and by another contractor between December 2011 and June
2013, in medical sales representative positions. (GE 1) Applicant held temporary jobs,
during her recurrent periods of unemployment between August 2007 and December
2011, and between June 2013 and October 2013. (GE 1; Tr. 41)
Finances
Applicant took out student loans from the DOE and a private lender between
April 2009 and March 2011 to finance her art classes. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 46-48) Due to
recurrent periods of unemployment and low-paying temporary jobs, Applicant fell
behind with her student loans that exceeded $15,000 in the aggregate. These loans
went into default sometime in 2012, and the accounts have remained in default, except
for two $90 payments she made in 2013. (GEs 1-4 and AE C; Tr. 48-49) 
Applicant has since entered into a payment program with the DOE pursuant to a
consolidated agreement with the lender and currently carries an aggregate loan
balance of $15,186. (AE A; Tr. 35) To date, she has not provided any evidence of
documented loan payment terms or credited DOE payments. Her March 2016
statement from the collection agent for her student loan lender recited only the
consolidated loan balance and credit for a monthly $5.00 payment. (AE A) Applicant’s
claims of making 10 such payments, beginning in September 2015, and proof of her
being placed in the lender’s rehabilitation program are not documented. (AE A; Tr. 35-
37) 
4
Applicant also incurred a separate student debt with her private educational
institution in the amount of $1,175 on a student loan she opened in November 2013.
(GEs 1-4; Tr. 54) This debt remains unpaid and unsatisfied. 
Applicant’s accrued delinquent debts include a delinquent debt with creditor 1.h
in the amount of $1,052. (GEs 2-4 and AE B) Applicant opened a credit card account
with creditor 1.h in November 2010, which she used for general purchases. (GE 2) This
account became past due in July 2011 and was not addressed by Applicant in the
ensuing three years. (GE 3) When interviewed by an agent of the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) in May 2014, she promised the agent she would begin making
payments on the account in July 2014. When she did not initiate payments as
promised, creditor 1.h’s collection agent obtained a default judgment against Applicant
in 2016 and commenced garnishment proceedings against her. (AE B; Tr. 56)
Altogether, creditor 1.h caused earnings to be withheld from Applicant by her employer
between December 2015 and March 2016 in the total amount of $1,692. (AE B; Tr. 37)
Creditor 1.h’s series of garnishments left Applicant with a balance of $500 to $600 to
pay off the debt. (Tr.  57) She provided no documentation, though, of her making any
voluntary payment progress on this debt. 
Applicant also remains indebted to creditor 1.j on a lease payment ($1,068) that
she continues to dispute. (Tr. 36) After paying her own share of the last month of the
lease, she vacated the apartment unit without covering her roommate’s $350 share.
(GEs 2-4; Tr. 36-37) She told the landlord that she should not be held responsible for
her roommate’s default. (GE 2; Tr. 37) Applicant provided no written evidence to
document the basis of her dispute with creditor 1.j or verification of her father’s paying
the roommate’s share of the final month of rent.
Applicant currently earns $35,000 a year (Tr. 39-40), which is considerably more
than what she earned with previous contractors. (Tr. 42) During her recurrent periods of
unemployment, she received financial support from her parents and resided with her
mother, rent-free. (Tr. 42-43) 
Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling or budgeting since she
fell behind with her listed debts in 2011.  She provided no financial plan for repayment
of her delinquent debts, and at this point has failed to meaningfully address most of her
delinquent debts with voluntary initiatives. Only the creditor 1.h debt has been
addressed, and it was addressed through garnishment actions taken by the creditor on
a default judgment, and not by any voluntary initiatives by Applicant.
Applicant’s involvement with marijuana  
From August 2007 to July 2011, Applicant smoked marijuana with her friends at
the time. (GE 2; Tr. 38, 58) Her marijuana use varied, but typically, she would smoke it
through a pipe, or in a cigarette form with her friends at parties. She neither bought or
sold marijuana for a profit, but occasionally (approximately every two months) purchased
marijuana for her friends to cost-share from April 2009 to February 2011. (GEs 1 and 3;
Tr. 61-62)  
5
In June 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with (a) marijuana possession
and use and (b) drug paraphernalia possession and use. (GE 3) She pled guilty to the
misdemeanor charges, was placed on probation, and was ordered to take substance
abuse classes on drug use and submit to random drug testing. (GE 1). In a random drug
test administered to her by her substance abuse counselors in April 2011, she tested
positive for marijuana and was dismissed from the program. (GE 2; Tr. 60) Permitted by
the court to return to the program in April 2012, Applicant completed her court-ordered
probation requirements in October 2013, and has since passed multiple random drug
screening tests with her current employer. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 60) 
Applicant assured she has not used marijuana or any illegal drugs since she
ceased using marijuana in February 2011. (GE 2; Tr. 61) She no longer associates with
individuals that use drugs and assures she will not return to illegal drug use in the future.
(GE 2; Tr. 61) She assured also that her significant other does not use illegal drugs of
any kind. (Tr. 64) Applicant’s assurances satisfy credibility criteria and are accepted.
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf.
Nor did she provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
{privacy] information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
trustworthiness concern [public trust position] and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate [trustworthiness
concerns].” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable public trust risk. 
6
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. . .  AG ¶ 18.
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations.  AG ¶ 24.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a public trust position depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
7
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain public trust position eligibility. The required materiality showing, however,
does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has
actually mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke
eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the
cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect
privacy information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Executive Order 10865 that all
trustworthiness determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the
applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility.
“[T]rustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”
See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent student loan and consumer debts over a period of several years that she
failed to address in material ways. Applicant’s recurrent problems with managing her
finances over a period of years while fully employed reflect lapses of judgment in
administering her financial responsibilities. 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulated debts covered
in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence,
§ 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed delinquent debts are fully
documented in her credit reports. Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s
insufficiently explained delinquent debts and her failure to demonstrate she acted
responsibly in addressing all of her listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App.
Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive
positions.” See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, ¶ ¶ C3, 1.2,
1.1.7, and C3. 1.2..3 (Jan. 1987, as amended) (the Regulation).  Holding a public trust
position involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, among which is the
expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the trust position. While the
principal concern of a trust position holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
8
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in
cases involving debt delinquencies.  
Although ADP I and ADP II positions are not expressly covered by Executive
Order 10865 or the Directive, which apply to contractor personnel, historically, the
same principles covering these positions have been applied in Regulation 5220.2
governing military and civilian personnel. The definitions used in the Regulation to
define ADP I and ADP II positions have equal applicability to contractors covered by
the Directive.
While some extenuating circumstances can be inferred from Applicant’s listed
periods of unemployment, too little information is documented to credit her with more
than partial extenuating circumstances. Based on the developed record, it is unclear
how her periods of unemployment between 2010 and 2011 played any role in her
financial decision-making. Only recently did she complete a payment agreement with
the collection agent for the listed medical creditors (creditors 1.i through 1.p) and has
not provided any evidence of good-faith payments on these debts to establish a
payment track record and solidify her payment commitments. 
Further, Applicant provided no documented follow-up to her expressed
commitments to work with the remaining listed creditors to pay off the remaining
balances. Considering the available documented evidence, extenuating
circumstances in this record are quite limited. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly.” 
Applicant’s payment efforts also lack payment proof. Her payment claims with
her creditors contain only limited documented proof and have not resulted in any
documented payoffs or resolution of any of her listed debts. 
Without documentation of financial counseling and more specific steps
Applicant is taking to address her outstanding debts, little mitigation credit is  available
to her. Based on the documented evidence in the record, none of the remaining
mitigation conditions apply to Applicant’s situation.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his failure to resolve his delinquent debts. Resolution of
her listed delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining control of his
finances. Applicant failed to provide more specific explanatory material for
consideration.  Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful,
too, in making a whole-person assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were
not provided. 
Overall, public trust eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable her to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome trust concerns arising out of
her lapses in judgment associated with her accumulation of delinquent student loan
9
and consumer debts for which she bears legal responsibility. Each of these debts
remains outstanding with no developed payment plan for resolving the debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s lack of more specific explanations for her debt accruals and evidence of
payments made on her listed debts, it is still too soon to make safe predictive
judgments about her ability to resolve her outstanding debts. Applicant fails to mitigate
trust concerns related to her outstanding debt delinquencies and associated judgment
lapses. More time is needed to facilitate Applicant’s documenting the necessary
progress with her debts to enable conclusions that her finances are sufficiently
stabilized to grant her eligibility to hold a public trust position. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j.  
Drug Use Concerns
Applicant used marijuana on a recurrent basis between August 2007 and July
2011. While she never purchased or sold drugs for a profit, she occasionally
(approximately every two months) purchased marijuana for her friends to cost-share
from April 2009 to February 2011. Her marijuana involvement included an arrest in
2010 and ensuing charges of marijuana/use and drug paraphernalia/possession in
2010. After her case, the presiding court ordered her to take substance abuse classes
on drug use and submit to random drug testing, which she completed in 2012.
Thereafter, she ceased her use and involvement with marijuana and has not used
marijuana in over five years.
On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”
and DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” Judgment
concerns exist over Applicant’s past drug use and purchases. She has some history
of marijuana use (i.e., between August 2007 and July 2011) and small purchases for
friends on a recurrent basis between April 2009 and February  2011, before ceasing
her involvement with illegal drugs and disassociating with persons who use drugs.  
Considering the lapse of time (approximately five years) since Applicant last
used or possessed marijuana and over five year since she last purchased marijuana
for friends, enough time has elapsed to facilitate safe predictable judgments that she
will not return to illegal drug use in the foreseeable future.  Pertinent mitigating
conditions covered by AG ¶ 24 are available to Applicant. MC ¶ 24(a), “the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances
that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and MC ¶ 24(b), “a demonstrated intent not to
use any drugs in the future, such as (1) disassociation from drug-using associates
and contacts, and (3) an appropriate period of abstinence,” apply to Applicant’s limited
and aged use and possession of marijuana.
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of her limited use and involvement with marijuana that she has
10
followed with sustained abstinence for close to five years. Applicant’s
acknowledgment of poor judgment and disassociation with persons who use illegal
drugs help to reinforce favorable conclusions about her overall judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness pertaining to involvement with illegal drugs. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
limited and aged (approximately five years) drug use and judgment lapses, Applicant
mitigates security concerns related to her drug use. Favorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.a-d of Guideline H.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.j:                Against Applicant
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):               FOR APPLICANT
   Subparas. 2.a through 2.d:     For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
11
  
