 
 
 
 
1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 15-04054 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts between 2010 and 2016. The majority of 
those debts were unpaid medical bills, which she has resolved. She mitigated the 
security concerns raised under the guideline for financial considerations. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing Investigation Request (e-QIP), as part of an investigation for 
a security clearance. On December 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
 
 
 
2 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 29, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On March 10, 2016, DOHA 
assigned the case to me and issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for April 8, 
2016. The case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 5 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through AE L into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 15, 2016. The record remained open until 
May 2, 2016, in order to provide Applicant time to submit additional documents.  
Applicant timely submitted exhibits that I marked as AE M through AE R, and admitted 
without objection. Subsequently, I requested a document that Applicant mentioned in an 
email. She promptly submitted the document, and I marked it as AE S. Department had 
no objection, and it is admitted into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the 26 allegations in the SOR, Applicant denied ¶¶ 1.h, 1.k, 1.l, 
1.n through 1.w, 1.y, and 1.z on the basis that she paid or resolved them. She admitted 
the remaining allegations. All admissions are incorporated herein. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old and married. She and her husband have three adult 
children. She has a Ph.D. In December 2014 she began a position with her current 
employer. Prior to obtaining this position, she experienced periods of unemployment 
sporadically, dating back to 2008. Her husband has not worked since 2008 or 2009. He 
receives disability payments. (Tr. 20-26; GE 2.) 
  
 During an interview in February 2015, a government investigator interviewed 
Applicant about matters in her December 2014 e-QIP, including delinquent debts. 
Applicant attributed some of her financial problems to periods of unemployment that 
began in August 2008, during which time she initially mismanaged her money and did 
not have enough to pay all bills. She also noted that she has been the primary income 
provider since her husband’s disability. (GE 2.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from February 2016, April 2015, and 
December 2014, the SOR listed 26 allegations, which included 18 unpaid medical bills, 
two past due mortgages, other miscellaneous debts. (GE 3, GE 4, and GE 5.) These 
debts accumulated between 2010 and 2015. A summary of the status of each debt is as 
follows: 
 
Debts Paid or Resolved: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant is resolving an unpaid mortgage balance of $10,663, which 
includes late fees of $6,444 and one month’s payment of $2,100. She said she 
fell behind in the payments when she was unemployed for four months before 
 
 
 
 
3 
obtaining her current position. She subsequently negotiated a smaller monthly 
payment that is $300 less than the previous one. She is trying to resolve the 
unpaid balance by making larger payments.  (Tr. 28-31; AE A.) The debt is being 
resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b. The unpaid mortgage of $106,114, relating to a rental home 
Applicant owned, was recently resolved through a short sale. She said that she 
received an offer in December 2015 and subsequently sold it. She said she does 
not owe anything on the mortgage and is waiting for a 1099-C. Her mortgage 
company told her she will not receive that form until January 2017. (Tr. 22: AE 
Q.) It is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m. The $100 debt owed to a retail store was paid in April 2016. (AE F.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.x. The $729 gas bill from Applicant’s rental property was paid in April 
2016. (AE M.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.y. The $3,033 debt owed for a car loan was settled and paid in February 
2015. (Tr. 46-47; AE H.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.z. The $52 past due amount owed to a credit card on a $627 balance is 
resolved. Her account is current. (AE Q.) 
 
The following medical debts owed to creditor C.C.1 are paid: SOR ¶ 1.c ($769); 
SOR ¶ 1.h ($188); SOR ¶ 1.j ($138); SOR ¶ 1.k ($130); SOR ¶ 1.l ($110); SOR ¶ 
1.n ($97); SOR ¶ 1.o ($95); SOR ¶ 1.r ($54); SOR ¶ 1.s ($50.); SOR ¶ 1.t ($50); 
and SOR ¶ 1.u ($50). (AE O, AE N, AE S.) 
 
The following medical debts owed to creditor C.F.2 are paid: SOR ¶ 1.p ($64); 
SOR ¶ 1.q ($53); SOR ¶ 1.v ($37); and SOR ¶ 1.w ($37). (Tr. 41-44; AE E.) 
 
Debts Disputed & Deleted 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d. The $566 cell phone debt was disputed and removed from her credit 
report. (AE D.) It is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e. The $409 internet debt was disputed and removed from her credit 
report. (AE D.) It is resolved. 
 
Unresolved 
 
The following medical debts owed to C.F. are unresolved: SOR ¶ 1.f ($287); SOR 
¶ 1.g ($201); and SOR ¶ 1.i ($150).  
                                            
1 C.C. is an abbreviation for the name of the collection agency for these medical bills. 
2 C.F. is an abbreviation for the name of the collection agency for these medical bills. 
 
 
 
 
4 
Applicant testified that she resolved a $331 medical debt owed to C.F. for $199. 
That debt was not alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 42-44; AE R.) She paid another medical debt 
for $222, which is not listed on the SOR. (Tr. 48; AE I.) 
 
  Applicant submitted a copy of her budget. Her annual salary is $85,000. Her net 
monthly income, including her husband’s disability payments, totals $5,700. Her 
expenses are about $2,800, and include payments on her student loans and credit 
cards. She has about $2,900 remaining at the end of the month. (Tr. 26; AE J.) She has 
not participated in financial or budget counseling, but reviews her credit report 
frequently. She filed her tax returns for the past five years. (Tr. 27.)  
   
 Applicant submitted her performance evaluation from December 2014 to May 
2015. She received an “Exceeds” rating (AE L.) She provided a letter from her 
supervisor for the past 15 months. He said that Applicant “exceeds her peers in all 
measures of maturity, loyalty and leadership.” (AE K.) He is aware that financial issues 
underlie her security clearance problems. (Tr. 24.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
 
 
 
 
5 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
As documented by CBRs and her admissions, Applicant began accumulating 
delinquent debts between 2010 and 2015 that she has been unable or unwilling to 
resolve. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
 
 
 
6 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s financial problems have been ongoing for about five years. Hence, 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Some delinquent debts arose as a result of Applicant’s 
periods of unemployment, which were circumstances beyond her control. However, she 
also acknowledged that she mismanaged her money while she was unemployed, which 
was within her control. Because she did not present sufficient evidence demonstrating 
that she attempted to responsibly manage debts while they were accumulating over the 
years, AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal application.  
 
Applicant provided evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(c). Although 
she has not participated in credit or financial counseling, she frequently reviews her 
credit report. She has a workable budget and has resolved the majority of the SOR 
debts. There are clear indications that her financial issues are under control. 
 
Applicant paid or resolved 23 of the 26 SOR-listed debts, albeit many of them 
recently, exhibiting a good-faith effort to resolve debts, and supporting the application of 
AG ¶ 20(d) as to those allegations. She provided evidence documenting that she 
successfully disputed two of the 23 debts, as required for application of AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 55-year-old woman, who 
has successfully worked for a defense contractor since December 2014. Prior to this 
position she experienced intervals of unemployment. In addition her husband stopped 
working in 2008 or 2009 as a result of a disability. These circumstances have affected 
her ability to pay delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant demonstrated that all but three SOR-listed debts remain unresolved. 
They are unpaid medical bills and total about $638. She is resolving a balance on her 
mortgage. Given her credibility and awareness that future delinquent debts may 
jeopardize her employment, I have no reason to believe that she will not resolve those 
debts and remain current with expenses in the future, especially if she continues to 
diligently monitor her credit and budget. The record evidence leaves me without 
questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.z:                  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
