 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01956 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 12, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts, in a total exceeding $17,400. 
Applicant failed to introduce documentation to show any of his delinquencies have been 
resolved. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2013, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On November 5, 2015, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 4, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
submitted the Government’s written case on January 4, 2016. The Government’s 
submission included Government Items (GE) 1 through 7. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on January 27, 2016. He was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s response to the FORM, and any 
objections to GE 1 through GE 7, were due on February 26, 2016. Applicant failed to 
submit anything by that date. As a result GE 1 through GE 3 and GE 5 through GE 7 
are admitted into the record without objection.1 The case was assigned to me on May 
11, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He has been employed by his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since March 2013. Applicant is divorced since 2004. He has two 
children. Applicant served on active duty in the Navy from 1997 to 2008. He achieved 
the rate of E-5. (GE 3.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts in a 
total exceeding $17,400.2 Applicant admitted all of the debts alleged in SOR. His debts 
are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7.) 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant’s debts consist of: a collection account in the amount of $11,858 (SOR 
¶ 1.a); a collection account in the amount of $867 (SOR ¶ 1.b); a medical debt in the 
amount of $603 (SOR ¶ 1.c); a delinquent educational loan in the amount of $459 (SOR 
¶ 1.d); a collection account in the amount of $365 (SOR ¶ 1.e); a delinquent educational 
loan in the amount of $435 (SOR ¶ 1.f); a charged-off account in the amount of $356 
(SOR ¶ 1.g); a delinquent cable bill in the amount of $300 (SOR ¶ 1.h); another 
delinquent cable account in the amount of $166 (SOR ¶ 1.i); a charged-off account in an 
unstated amount (SOR ¶ 1.k); a charged-off vehicle loan in an unstated amount (SOR ¶ 
1.l); a debt to a state in the amount of $900 (SOR ¶ 1.m); a collection account in the 
amount of $379 (SOR ¶ 1.n); a medical collections account in the amount of $603 (SOR 
¶ 1.o); and a collection account in the amount of $139 (SOR ¶ 1.p). All of these SOR-
listed debts remain delinquent.  
 
 Applicant has not provided evidence of actions taken to address any of his SOR-
listed debts. He provided no household budget showing monthly household expenses. 
He did not provide a copy of his earnings statement. Without this or similar information, I 
am unable to assess his current financial status and his ability or willingness to repay 
his past-due debts. The record lacks any evidence of credit or financial counseling. 
                                                          
1GE 4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an 
unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management in 
July 2014. Applicant did not adopt it as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. 
2 The SOR allegations do not contain a ¶ 1.j.  
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He has been unable or 
unwilling to address his delinquencies. The evidence raises security concerns under 
both of these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. All of Applicants 15 delinquent 
accounts remain unresolved. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems 
are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no explanation for his financial delinquencies. Further, he 
failed to establish that he has acted responsibly or responsibly. He has not 
demonstrated that he addressed his debts in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there are no 
clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
 
6 
 
financial problems remain unresolved. In addition, he is a mature adult and as a former 
military member, should be aware that his personal finances are of concern to the 
Government. While he was given the opportunity to document the status of his debts, 
he failed to produce evidence of any actions on his 15 delinquent accounts. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k through 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
