 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08724 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, GREGG A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
March 9, 2012. On July 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct.2 On September 30, 2015, the SOR was amended by Department 
Counsel to amend and clarify SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e.  
 
                                                          
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the original SOR on August 10, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. He responded to the amended SOR on October 
22, 2015. He denied all of the SOR allegations. The case was assigned to me on July 9, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 15, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 13, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into 
evidence; however, Applicant objected to the accuracy of GE 2. The exhibit will be 
addressed in my findings of fact. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 21, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old, and has been employed as a systems engineer for a 
defense contractor since 1999. He is applying to continue his security clearance. He 
completed high school in 1976, and completed some college work. He honorably served 
in the U.S. Navy from 1976 to 1999, retiring as a Senior Chief Petty Officer (E-8). He 
served in the first Gulf War and has deployed aboard ships numerous times while on 
active duty and as a civilian technical representative. He married in 2005 and has three 
adult children from a previous marriage. His first security clearance was granted in 
1984, and it was continued at various levels for years to follow.3 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E, that Applicant falsified his 2001 and 2012 
SCAs by not disclosing a 1977 arrest and court-martial for possession of marijuana and 
medication without a prescription, and a 1984 arrest for driving under the influence of 
alcohol. Additionally, the SOR alleges Applicant did not report his use of marijuana from 
1976 to 1978 while holding a security clearance, in his 2001 and 2012 SCAs. Finally, 
the SOR alleges Applicant failed to truthfully describe his past drug involvement during 
an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview in 2012. Applicant denied all of 
the SOR allegations, and provided explanations in his answer to the SOR and during 
his testimony. 
 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1976 at the age of 20. In 1977, he was 
apprehended on base after a command authorized search was conducted. They 
discovered Applicant possessed “nine bags” of marijuana, and green colored pills 
without a prescription (tested as a non-controlled muscle relaxant and acetaminophen 
obtainable by prescription). Applicant admitted buying the marijuana off base and 
trading for the muscle relaxant. He claimed that the marijuana was for his own use, but 
that he would supply to friends “at his cost,” and the pills were intended for a girlfriend. 
According to his testimony, he was convicted at a special court-martial for possession of 
illegal drugs. There was no official document presented showing the actual charges, 
type of court-martial, conviction, sentence, or results of appeal. According to Applicant, 
his conviction was later overturned on appeal. 
 
Applicant’s electronic security clearance applications (SCAs) from 2001 and 
2012 make no reference to these events. When interviewed by an OPM investigator in 
                                                          
3 AE E. 
 
3 
 
2012, the summary of the interview indicated that Applicant admitted he was arrested 
for having a “dime”4 bag of marijuana but no prescription drugs were involved; he was 
found guilty in  military court, and was sentenced to reduction in rate and confinement to 
the base for six months where he washed buses. The verdict was eventually overturned 
on appeal.5 He gave a similar recitation in his answer to the SOR. 
 
In 1984, Applicant was driving erratically when he was stopped by base police, 
who determined he was intoxicated, and arrested him. He was administered a 
breathalyzer test and accused of drunk driving. He testified that he appeared before his 
executive officer (XO) to answer questions. The XO decided not to forward the charge 
for disciplinary action and the incident was dismissed.6 Beside the arrest report, the 
Government did not submit documentary evidence of any action taken after the arrest. 
In testimony, Applicant claimed he did not think he was “arrested” since he was taken to 
the security office, placed into a holding room with an open door, and told to “sleep it 
off.” Also, he was not charged or disciplined as the case never went past the XO 
investigation level. 
 
In or about 2001, Applicant testified that he submitted a handwritten SCA. He did 
not recognize the unsigned, unverified computer-generated SCA submitted by the 
Government in GE 2. He testified that, to the best of his memory, GE 2 did not reflect 
what he would have submitted in writing, where he believes he listed his past drug and 
alcohol related offenses. 
 
In 2012, he again completed an SCA to update his security clearance, and failed 
to list either incident. He claimed that he did not intentionally omit the information, rather 
he was confused by the questions in the SCA because the incidents were so old, were 
military versus civilian matters, and the fact that the court-martial was overturned and 
the DUI was dismissed. He also asserted that he did not have a security clearance 
when the drug and alcohol incidents occurred. Applicant believes he freely discussed 
the two incidents in question to the best of his recollection when interviewed by OPM, 
although he indicated the facts became clearer once he received documents in 
discovery from the Government after the SOR was issued. 
 
Applicant submitted character letters from various colleagues, including his vice 
president of engineering, project manager, and government agency branch manager. 
The letters generally attest to his high character, trustworthiness, adherence to rules 
and regulations, work ethic, personal ethics, and devotion to duty. 
 
 
                                                          
4 In testimony, he described a dime bag as a quantity that could be purchased for $10. He then split the 
marijuana into smaller bags to take on a trip. 
 
5 His military rate (rank) of E-4 was reinstated, and he was selected for promotion to E-5 a few months 
later after passing a promotion exam. He eventually retired at the senior enlisted rate of E-8. 
 
6 He described this process as a “board of inquiry” and an executive officer investigation (XOI), where he 
was asked questions and the executive officer (XO) was to decide to either dismiss the charge or 
recommend going forward with disciplinary action. The XO decided to dismiss the charge. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
  The relevant disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16 is: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
  When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.7 
 
  I conclude the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶16(a) and (b) have not been 
raised. Applicant successfully rebutted the allegations related to the 2001 SCA and his 
involvement with drugs while holding a security clearance (SOR ¶¶1.a, 1.b, 1.d). There 
is insufficient evidence of intentional falsification of his 2001 SCA as Applicant rebutted 
the accuracy of GE 2, testified that he completed an SCA by hand, and believes he 
noted his court-martial and DUI incident on the handwritten form that was not 
transferred to the computer generated SCA. Additionally, there is insufficient evidence 
to show that Applicant held a security clearance while he used  marijuana or at the time 
of the two incidents at issue here. In fact, Applicant submitted evidence that directly 
contradicts SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d.  
 
  The facts related to his alcohol and drug incidents were omitted from his 2012 
SCA. Applicant believed that since the court-martial was more than seven years old, 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-
23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
6 
 
was not a civilian trial, and the conviction was overturned on appeal, that it did not have 
to be reported. Likewise, he used the same logic about the need to report the DUI 
incident, since it too was an on-base incident with military police, not civilian police, and 
resulted in no disciplinary action. He was wrong in both instances, but he did not 
intentionally falsify the SCA. Applicant freely discussed the two incidents to the best of 
his recollection when interviewed by OPM, although indicated in testimony that his 
memory was later clarified after he received the Government’s documents in the 
discovery process. Overall, I find that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SCAs or 
information provided to the OPM investigator. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. 
 
 It is significant to note that Applicant’s drug possession court-martial occurred 
nearly 40 years ago and his conviction was overturned. His alcohol related incident 
occurred 32 years ago, and was dismissed by the command without disciplinary action. 
Despite these incidents, he continued his military career on active duty, was promoted, 
and eventually honorably retired as a senior enlisted member. He moved directly into a 
job as a government contractor, where he has remained with a security clearance since 
about 2001, without incident. In addition, he freely discussed these incidents to the best 
of his ability given the length of time since they occurred without the benefit of reviewing 
factual documents prior to the interview. He is considered by his colleagues to be a 
person with high character, trustworthy, devoted, ethical, and adheres to rules and 
regulations. 
 
 
7 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR 
and amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
GREGG A. CERVI 
Administrative Judge 
