 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                      )  ISCR Case No. 12-04461 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William H. Henderson, Personal Representative 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the United States and educated through the bachelor’s 
degree level in the United States. From 2003 to 2010, he lived in China, and he 
received a master’s degree. After leaving China, his connections to China have been 
very limited, and he has not had contact with anyone who is a citizen and resident of 
China since 2010. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. Access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On February 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted or denied. (HE 2)  
 
On May 7, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing. (HE 3) On August 8, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
August 30, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On October 4, 2016, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for 
October 28, 2016. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. Department 
Counsel offered three exhibits into evidence; Applicant offered two exhibits into 
evidence; and all exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 16, 21-22; 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-3; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-B) On November 7, 2016, 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.   
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts 
concerning China (AN). (Tr. 16; HE 4) Department Counsel’s AN listed five supporting 
documents to show detail and context for those facts. (HE 4 at 4-5, Items I-V) Applicant 
objected to the AN request because much of the AN notice information pertained to 
attempts of Chinese intelligence services to influence person’s born in China, with 
relatives in China, or persons of Chinese descent. (Tr. 18-19; AE A) Applicant was not 
born in China, has no relatives in China, and is not of Chinese dissent. I sustained the 
objection to the part of the AN request indicating a foreign influence concern arising 
from persons born in China, with relatives in China, or persons of Chinese descent. I 
overruled the remainder of Applicant’s relevance objection. (Tr. 19) There were no other 
objections, and I granted the AN request. (Tr. 19-20; HE 4) Department Counsel’s 
request for AN is quoted in the fourth through sixth paragraphs without introduction, 
quotation marks, brackets, and footnotes in the section labeled “China,” infra. The 
information pertained to attempts of Chinese intelligence services to influence person’s 
born in China, with relatives in China, or persons of Chinese descent were retained in 
the China section for completeness, but were not considered. A brief paragraph is 
substituted for the last paragraph of the administrative notice request. 
 
The first paragraph in the China section is from the U.S. Dept. of State website, 
“Background Note, China,” (September 6, 2011), http://www.state.gov/outofdate/ 
bgn/china/189475.htm. (HE 5) The second and third paragraphs are taken verbatim 
from the U.S. Dept. of State website, “U.S. Relations with China, Fact Sheet,” (January 
21, 2015), http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/18902.htm. (HE 6) The parties had no 
objection to me taking AN of some of the contents of these two documents. (Tr. 20-21) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).     
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted in part the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old policy analyst who has worked for the same DOD 
contractor for six years. (Tr. 23; SOR response at 6; GE 3 at 9) He was born in the 
United States, and he has resided 31 years in the United States and 7 years in China. 
(Tr. 23) He attended school through the bachelor’s degree level in the United States. 
(Tr. 23-24) He lived in China from 2003 to 2010. In 2010, he returned to the United 
States to enroll in a Ph.D. program and to begin employment with his current employer. 
(Tr. 25) In 2014, he received a Ph.D. in policy analysis. (Tr. 46; GE 3 at 8) In 2015, he 
married, and he does not have any children. (SOR response at 7)  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
In 2003, Applicant moved to China to teach English, to learn Chinese, and to 
enhance his career. (Tr. 24; GE 3 at 2) At times he was employed by companies in 
China or at Chinese schools to teach English. (Tr. 25, 44; SOR response ¶ 1.e; GE 3 at 
3-4) In 2008, he received a master’s degree in China. (Tr. 46; GE 3 at 5) He has not 
received any contacts from any Chinese companies since he left China in 2010. (Tr. 39)  
 
When Applicant lived in China, he associated with numerous citizens and 
residents of China, including an officer of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). (SOR 
response ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c) He met a PLA officer while attending a Chinese university; 
however, he has not had any contact or communication with him after 2010. (Tr. 31) In 
2008, he had a brief discussion with a person who was a member of the Chinese 
Foreign Ministry at a dinner in China; however, he did not have any contact with him 
after that dinner. (Tr. 32; SOR response ¶ 1.b)   
 
In 2007, and in 2009, he received Chinese Government scholarships totaling 
$8,700. (Tr. 38, 45; SOR response ¶ 1.d) Those scholarships were available to any 
foreign student and did not entail acceptance of any obligations or conditions to the 
Chinese Government. (Tr. 38-39)  
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, or 
locations in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific 
information. Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the facts in this section are from Applicant’s SF 86. 
(GE 1) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant has not returned to China since 2010. (Tr. 26; GE 3 at 12) Applicant 
disclosed his Chinese contacts in his SCA and in a December 2011 affidavit. (Tr. 27-28; 
GE 1; GE 3) In the last several years, he received security-related training. (Tr. 28-29) 
In 2010, Applicant received an email from someone in China asking to be put in touch 
with Applicant’s employer; Applicant did not respond to the email; and he reported the 
email to security. (Tr. 29-30; SOR response at 4) He promised to report any future 
contacts from citizens and residents of China to security. (Tr. 30)   
 
Applicant has not had contacts with any citizens and residents in China since 
2010. He acknowledged that he has friends or associates who are nationals of China 
who live in the United States and either are married to U.S. citizens, are colleagues at 
work, or attend U.S. universities. (Tr. 32-36; SOR response, Ex. A) Applicant does not 
have any family members who are citizens or residents of China. (Tr. 24) 
 
Applicant has two Chinese bank accounts with minimal amounts of funds in them 
(less than $50 total). (Tr. 40) He is unable to close the accounts without returning to 
China. (Tr. 40) He offered to return to China to close the accounts if that would alleviate 
remaining security concerns. (SOR response, Ex. B) 
 
Connections to the United States 
 
Applicant’s parents and sister are citizens and residents of the United States, and 
he has frequent contact with them. (Tr. 42, 47) He has six aunts and uncles and six first 
cousins who are citizens and residents of the United States. (Tr. 47-50) His spouse, 
who is a speech therapist, was born in the United States, and her brother is a U.S. 
citizen. (Tr. 48-49; SOR response at 7) His spouse’s parents were born in South Korea; 
they are naturalized U.S. citizens; and they reside in the United States. (SOR response 
at 7) Applicant and his spouse’s net worth in the United States is about $450,000. (Tr. 
49)   
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s colleagues at work and graduate school, faculty at graduate school, 
and friends, who have known Applicant professionally and socially for many years, 
provided statements supporting his access to classified information. (SOR response, 
Ex. C-H; AE B) The general sense of Applicant’s character statements is that Applicant 
is diligent, intelligent, honest, reliable, responsible, conscientious about security, and 
exclusively loyal to the United States. (SOR response, Ex. C-H; AE B)   
 
China 
 
China has powerful military forces, including strategic nuclear missiles. China is 
geographically vast, and has a population of 1.3 billion people. It has significant 
resources and an economy that in recent years has rapidly expanded. China 
aggressively competes with the United States in many areas. China’s competitive 
relationship with the United States exacerbates the risk posed by an applicant’s 
connections to family members living in the China.   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The United States seeks to build a positive, cooperative, and comprehensive 
relationship with China by expanding areas of cooperation and addressing areas of 
disagreement, such as human rights and cybersecurity. The United States welcomes a 
strong, peaceful, and prosperous China playing a greater role in world affairs and seeks 
to advance practical cooperation with China. The annual Strategic and Economic 
Dialogue (S&ED) has served as a unique platform to promote bilateral understanding, 
expand consensus, discuss differences, build mutual trust, and increase cooperation. 
The strategic track of the S&ED has produced benefits for both countries through a wide 
range of joint projects and initiatives and expanded avenues for addressing common 
regional and global challenges such as proliferation concerns in Iran and North Korea, 
tensions between Sudan and South Sudan, climate change, environmental protection, 
and energy security. The United States has emphasized the need to enhance bilateral 
trust through increased high-level exchanges, formal dialogues, and expanded people-
to-people ties. On November 10, 2014, President Obama announced a reciprocal visa 
validity arrangement with China, increasing the validity of short-term tourist and 
business visas issued to each other’s citizens from one to ten years, and increasing the 
validity of student and exchange visas from one to five years. The U.S. approach to 
China is an integral part of reinvigorated U.S. engagement with the Asia-Pacific region. 
 
The U.S. approach to its economic relations with China has two main elements: 
integrating China into the global, rules-based economic and trading system and 
expanding U.S. exporters’ and investors’ access to the Chinese market. Two-way trade 
between China and the United States has grown from $33 billion in 1992 to over $562 
billion in goods in 2013. China is currently the third largest export market for U.S. goods 
(after Canada and Mexico), and the United States is China’s largest export market. The 
stock of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in China was $61 billion in 2013, up from 
$54 billion in 2012, and remained primarily in the manufacturing sector. During the 
economic track of the July 2014 S&ED, the two countries announced measures to 
strengthen macroeconomic cooperation, promote open trade and investment, enhance 
global cooperation and international rules, and foster financial stability and reform. For 
more information see http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/Pages/china.aspx. 
 
The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms (including meeting rooms), offices, cars, taxis, 
telephones, Internet, usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, 
and personal possessions in hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched 
without travelers’ knowledge or consent. Additionally, on occasion in recent years, 
citizens of the United States and other countries visiting or resident in China have been 
interrogated or detained for reasons said to be related to state security. In such 
circumstances, travelers could face arrest, detention or an exit ban prohibiting their 
departure from China for a prolonged period. Dual U.S.-Chinese nationals and U.S. 
citizens of Chinese heritage may be at a higher risk of facing such special scrutiny. 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or email. 
China uses a variety of methods to acquire foreign military and dual-use technologies, 
including cyber activity and exploitation of the access of Chinese nationals—such as 
students or researchers—acting as procurement agents or intermediaries. China very 
likely uses its intelligence services and employs other illicit approaches that violate U.S. 
laws and export controls to obtain key national security and export-restricted 
technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials unobtainable through other 
means.  
 
The U.S. Department of Justice maintains a summary of recent major U.S. export 
enforcement, economic espionage, trade secret and embargo-related criminal cases 
that have been prosecuted following investigation by the Homeland Security 
Investigations (HSI), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Department of 
Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), among other agencies. In recent 
years, these cases include actual or attempted espionage, procurement and/or illegal 
export of sensitive military technology to China, including proprietary documents setting 
forth information used in developing titanium for U.S. military aircraft; drone, missile and 
stealth technology; dual-use pressure transducers that can be used to produce 
weapons-grade uranium; military sensors that the U.S. does not allow to be exported to 
China; military software used for China’s first modern attack helicopter; and firearms, 
among other sensitive military technologies.  
  
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China in 2015, the U.S. 
Department of State reported a long list of human rights violations which make it clear 
that the Chinese Communist Party will violate numerous human rights standards to gain 
political, economic, or military advantage from extrajudicial killings to various violations 
of due process. 
    
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant lived in China from 2003 to 2010. He had contacts with citizens and 
residents of China that create a potential heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of the nature of the Chinese 
Government and its aggressive pursuit of intelligence information from the United 
States. His two financial accounts in China are worth less than $50 and do not raise any 
security concern. The scholarships he received from the Chinese Government were 
provided to all foreign students and did not entail any obligation to China.   
 
Applicant’s relationships with residents of China create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and the possibility 
that he might aid citizens and residents of China. For example, if intelligence agents or 
government officials in China wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert 
pressure on his Chinese associates. Applicant would then be subject to coercion and 
classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s associates are vulnerable to government coercion or 
inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, the applicant’s associates are 
associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship of China 
with the United States, and China’s “history of conducting espionage against the United 
States puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant” to demonstrate that his relationship 
with his Chinese associates does not pose a security risk. See ISCR Case No. 12-
04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013). Applicant should not be placed into a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist his Chinese associates. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from any foreign country 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
Chinese associates, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. Applicant’s relationships with his Chinese associates create a potential conflict of 
interest because these relationships raise a security concern about his desire to assist 
his Chinese associates by providing sensitive or classified information. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts or relationships with his 
Chinese associates and of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and 7(b) are established, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns in this case including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) through 8(c) apply. Applicant does not have frequent2 contacts with 
anyone who is a citizen and resident of China. He has not communicated with anyone 
living in China since 2010. He has not visited China since 2010. He does not provide 
financial support to anyone living in China. There is “little likelihood that [his 
relationships with Chinese associates] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.” His relationships with Chinese citizens living in the United States are not 
sufficiently close to cause a security risk.   
 
There is no evidence that the Chinese government or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his Chinese associates for 
classified or sensitive information.3 As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant 
or his Chinese associates would be specifically selected as targets for improper 
coercion or exploitation.  
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in China. 
Applicant’s Chinese associates could become potential targets of intelligence agents 
because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add some risk to his Chinese associates living 
in China.   
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” His 
relationship with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of 
interest created by his relationships with his Chinese associates. He has significant 
connections to the United States and limited connections to China. Applicant was born 
in the United States, and he lived 31 of his 38 years in the United States. He was 
educated through the bachelor’s degree level in the United States; he received his 
master’s degree in China; and he received his Ph.D. in the United States. He has 
                                            
2See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
3There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
numerous relatives living in the United States, including his parents, spouse, in laws, 
aunts, uncles, and cousins. He does not have any relatives living in China.  
 
Applicant’s contacts in China are limited. Although, he had numerous Chinese 
associates when he lived in China from 2003 to 2010, after leaving China, he ended his 
contacts with his Chinese associates living in China. Security concerns are not analyzed 
in a piecemeal assessment. Instead, the overall situation must be considered. 
Applicant’s 31 years of U.S. residence in the United States and his family living in the 
United States constitute much stronger connections to the United States than to China. 
In addition to their U.S. employment, Applicant and his spouse’s net worth in the United 
States is about $450,000. His economic connection to China is two bank accounts with 
a total of only $50. He is not close to anyone who is vulnerable to potential Chinese 
coercion. He promised to report any contacts from residents of China to his security 
manager. Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant lived in China from 2003 to 2010, and he associated with 
numerous citizens and residents of China; however, Applicant is not close to, and has 
not communicated with, anyone who is a citizen and resident of China since 2010. Any 
connections to China must be carefully assessed for foreign influence security 
concerns. Applicant should not be placed into a position where Chinese government or 
intelligence officials could coerce him through his Chinese associates in an attempt to 
obtain classified information.       
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents.4 
The danger of coercion from the Chinese government or intelligence agents is greater 
than in many other countries. China competes with the United States militarily, 
diplomatically, and through trade. China has a history of espionage targeting U.S. 
military and industrial secrets.       
 
Applicant’s close connections to the United States as described in the foreign 
influence section outweigh his connections to China. The general sense of Applicant’s 
character statements is that Applicant is diligent, intelligent, honest, reliable, 
responsible, conscientious about security, and loyal to the United States.  
   
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
