 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04047 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, GREGG A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
January 14, 2013. On October 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline J, 
criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct.2 
 
                                                          
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 17, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
5, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 29, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 6, 2016. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit documents in support of his case. He submitted AE C through J, 
which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old, and is employed as a training manager for a defense 
contractor since 2001. He is applying to continue his security clearance. He was 
awarded an associates degree in 2013 and bachelor’s degree in 2014, and is four 
classes away from attaining his master’s degree. He is currently pursuing a master’s 
degree. He honorably served in the U.S. Navy from 1992 to 2005, and in the U.S. Navy 
Reserve from 2005 to 2007. He was discharged as a Petty Officer First Class (E-6). He 
was married in 2001 and has four children, ages 10, 14 and twin 13 year olds. 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline J, five instances of criminal conduct. From 
1995 to 2004, Applicant was disciplined while in the military for three offenses involving 
alcohol. In 2011, while a civilian, he was arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI) and misdemeanor assault on a family member. The SOR also cross-
alleges these offenses under Guideline E. He admitted the Guideline J allegations, and 
denied the Guideline E allegation. 
 
In 1995, Applicant received non-judicial punishment (NJP) for an incident when 
he was drinking with friends at a housing area and was observed by shore patrol 
urinating behind a tree. He was nearly 21 years old and states that he was assigned to 
the first ship that included female sailors, so underage drinking and fraternization were 
included in the charges. He described the incident as “stupidity” on his part. In 1996, 
Applicant received an NJP for missing the movement of his ship, and drunk and 
disorderly after he was intoxicated during a port call in Hawaii and was arrested while 
trying to walk back to the ship. He was in jail awaiting a court appearance when his ship 
departed for its homeport without him. In 2004, while stationed overseas, Applicant 
stopped after work to drink alcohol, and returned to his car with a flat tire. While 
changing the tire, local police stopped to question him and turned him over to his 
command. 
 
In 2011, while drinking at home, Applicant argued with his spouse, called police, 
and while talking to the officer, pushed his spouse away from him. He was arrested for 
assault on a family member, but the charge was dismissed because there was no prior 
incident of abuse. He described this incident as “his stupidity” as well. Again in 2011, 
Applicant was leaving a business dinner out of state when he was stopped by police 
while driving and arrested for DUI. Applicant pleaded guilty and was required to 
complete an alcohol rehabilitation program. Applicant returned to his home state, 
 
3 
 
completed an adult intensive outpatient program in 2012, but later learned the court 
required it to be a course related to alcohol and driving (AE H). Applicant completed an 
alcohol safety action program which included alcohol/substance abuse education 
classes from June 2013 to March 2014 (AE I). His classes required regular substance 
testing, but did not result in an alcohol related diagnosis. Since 2011, Applicant has 
been attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, and has a sponsor that submitted 
a letter in support of his sobriety efforts (AE F). He stated he has not consumed alcohol 
since 2011, and changed his environment where alcohol is prevalent, including a job 
where alcohol use was common, and his home life has improved. He changed his 
lifestyle to substitute drinking with pursuing his college education, community events, 
and his children’s activities such as becoming the swim team president and coaching 
two softball teams. He provided letters of recommendation from coworkers that know 
him on and off the job, including a supervisor, and are aware of his past alcohol related 
incidents. They attest to his character and dedication, and having never seen him drink 
at social events. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of  whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant has multiple alcohol-related arrests, a conviction for DUI and three non-
judicial punishment actions while in the military. The above disqualifying conditions are 
applicable. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant admitted the offenses and described most of them in terms of his 
stupidity. He is no longer on probation, and he acknowledged that his alcohol use lead 
to criminal conduct. He has turned his life around. He no longer puts himself in 
situations where alcohol is used, and changed jobs to avoid excessive alcohol use. 
Although he was not diagnosed with an alcohol related disease, he discontinued alcohol 
use in 2011, successfully completed two intense alcohol rehabilitation courses that 
included substance testing, and continues to attend AA meetings. His home life has 
improved, and he is active in the community and his children’s activities. He has the 
support of his AA sponsor, coworkers, and management. He has turned his attention to 
completing his college degree and is four classes away from a master’s degree. AG ¶ 
32(a) and (d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
  The relevant disqualifying condition under AG ¶16 is: 
 
(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
  Although the SOR offenses listed under Guideline J, that underlie the Guideline 
E allegations, are sufficient for an adverse determination under that guideline, I will 
consider them under AG ¶ 16(c). Applicant’s criminal history, viewed together in a 
holistic fashion, presumes an assessment of questionable judgment and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
  Although the offenses are not necessarily minor, the last serious offense that 
resulted in a DUI conviction was in 2011. The common factor in the criminal conduct 
allegations is alcohol use. By 2011, Applicant concluded that alcohol was leading to 
continued criminal offenses, and a change in lifestyle was necessary. He acknowledged 
his past behavior, obtained counseling, and continues to attend AA meetings in his 
efforts to maintain sobriety. He changed his environment, and has improved his life 
through education and community involvement. He has not consumed alcohol since 
2011, and has no pending criminal actions. Through the support of his family and 
coworkers, I believe Applicant has turned the corner on his criminal activity and alcohol 
abuse, and his judgment is no longer at issue. AG ¶ 17(c), (d) and (e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
GREGG A. CERVI 
Administrative Judge 
