1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
----------------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 14-04983 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Public Trust Position (e-
QIP), on April 2, 2014. On January 26, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoDCAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for Applicant 
detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 25, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on June 9, 2015.  
 
2 
 
I received the original case assignment on June 15, 2015. It was transferred to 
another administrative judge on June 18, 2015, and attempted to be set for a video 
teleconference hearing on November 23, 2015. That hearing did not occur because of 
technical difficulties. The case was transferred back to me on February 26, 2016.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on June 14, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 30, 2016. The 
government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were received without objection.  
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through N, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 11, 2016. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information 
is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant did not specifically admit or deny each 
allegation of delinquent debt. He submitted documents addressing each allegation to 
show he took action on each debt to support his request for eligibility for a public trust 
position.   
 
Applicant is 50 years old, unmarried, and is not employed. He seeks a 
trustworthiness decision to obtain a logistics position with a federal agency. Applicant 
served in the U. S. Army from 1985 to 1988 when he was discharged. He graduated 
from college in 2000 with a degree in computer music production. He has never held a 
long-term job and his only source of direct income is disability pay. His financial history 
shows his income comes from Social Security disability payments of currently about 
$1,900 a month, and Veterans Administration (VA) medical benefits. His earnings, he 
claims, have never exceeded $13,000 since 2008. He has savings of $4,000 in a local 
bank and a checking account also. This money is the remainder of a $12,000 back 
payment for disability in 2009. (Tr. 22, 28, 50, 57, 61, 62, 64, 67; Exhibit N) 
 
In 2008 Applicant was hospitalized in a VA hospital for suicidal tendencies “for 
business turndown and economic hardship.” As a result of this condition Applicant has 
not repaid his debts because he has been unable to obtain suitable employment 
commensurate with his education. (Tr. 36, 59)  
 
Applicant has ten delinquent debts listed in the SOR. They total $12,163. He did 
not file his Federal income tax returns for 2009 to 2013 (Subparagraph 1.k). He also has 
not filed income tax returns for 2014 and 2015. He claimed he made so little money that 
he did not have to pay any taxes or file tax returns. His student loans are deferred 
annually based on his income and disability status. They are not alleged as delinquent 
in the SOR. (Tr. 24, 27; Exhibits 3-5; SOR)  
 
Applicant has not had taxable income since 2008. His earnings record from the 
Social Security Administration shows zero income since 2008 to 2014. He does not pay 
3 
 
rent, nor electricity costs, cell telephone fees, cable or internet fees, car insurance, or 
garbage pickup. He pays different amounts each month depending on use for gasoline, 
groceries, and restaurant eating. He asserts he repaid his credit card and is trying to 
repay the delinquent debts in the SOR. He is supported currently by a woman who lives 
in a house she owns outright. The woman’s mother pays their property taxes and 
insurance premiums. He admitted that at various periods in his life he has had similar 
living arrangements and was supported by his girlfriends. (Tr. 25, 26, 56-58; Exhibit N)  
 
Applicant owes $9,231 on an apartment lease from 2008 (Subparagraph 1.a). He 
was hospitalized that year. The rent was $2,200 per month. Applicant stated his 
roommate never paid her share of the rent and he could not afford it by himself. He 
testified they were in a joint business venture to raise a lot of money in media 
production but the work never materialized. He only lived in the apartment for two 
months in 2008. He stated further that his partner “ended up having many identity thefts 
of my identity which resulted in a catastrophic suicidal situation where the lease 
crumbled, the business crumbled. It was an over-extension of hope.” Since 2008 
Applicant’s only communication with the creditor leasing company was a 2015 counter-
offer on the debt, but it was not accepted. He has not made any payments on this debt 
and it is not resolved. Applicant stated the debt is no longer on his credit report and he 
does intend to pay it. (Tr. 28-36, 49; Exhibits 3-5 F) 
 
Applicant owes $1,388 on a medical account from 2014 (Subparagraph 1.b).  
Applicant testified he entered an installment payment agreement of $25 monthly from 
March 2015 on this debt and has made the payments regularly. The balance now is 
$1,263. He also stated there was an additional $300 owed for another medical debt 
(Subparagraph 1.f). The debt has decreased since March 2015 by $400 made in 16 
payments in 2015 and 2016. These two debts are being resolved. (Tr. 36, 37, 42, 52; 
Exhibits 3-5, G, F)  
 
Applicant owes a cable television debt of $481 (Subparagraph 1.c). Applicant 
contends the debt is resolved. He stated he could not find any proof from the collector 
for this debt; therefore he must not owe it. He offers documents pertaining to the lease 
debt in Subparagraph 1.a and opines the cable debt may be part of the total debt owed 
on the lease. Applicant admitted he has not disputed the debt nor resolved it by 
payment. (Tr. 38-40; Exhibits 4, H) 
 
Applicant thinks the three debts listed in the SOR owed to a collector for a city 
are for his “doing business as” licenses annually. They are $380, $336, and $275 
(Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g). These debts are for a sound production company 
Applicant operated in that city. The city claims a total debt of $1,284.83. Applicant does 
not believe he owes these debts. His exhibit shows the accounts were cancelled and 
deleted from his credit reports. (Tr. 40-42; Exhibits 3-5, I) 
 
Applicant owed a gas company $141 for heat in his residence. (Subparagraph 
1.h) He claims he disputed the debt and it was removed from his credit report. He 
4 
 
denied having an account with that gas company. This debt is deleted by dispute, not 
paid. (Tr. 42, 54, 55; Exhibits 3-5, K) 
 
Applicant owed a telephone company $60 (Subparagraph 1.i). He claims he 
disputed it and it was removed from his credit report. He submitted a letter from the debt 
collector showing the debt was paid in full. It is resolved. (Tr. 43, 54, 55; Exhibits 3-5, L) 
 
Applicant owed a collector $52 on a medical account (Subparagraph 1.j). This 
debt is resolved as shown by the letter from the creditor showing a zero balance owed. 
(Tr. 43, 44, 54, 55; Exhibits 3-5, M) 
 
Applicant actually paid only the debts owed for medical procedures. The 
remaining debts he disputed or ignored. He was confronted with them in 2014 by the 
government investigator. He waited until he received the SOR in January 2015 until he 
attempted to pay the medical debts. He claimed he did not recognize or remember the 
other delinquent debts. (Tr. 46-49, 51) 
 
Applicant has not filed his federal income tax forms from 2009 to 2015 
(Subparagraph 1.k). He claims his social security income is below the level required to 
file the tax returns. Applicant asserts based on his last exhibit that he is exempt from the 
filing requirement.1 (Tr. 52, 53, 56; Exhibit N) 
 
Applicant’s e-QIP states in answering Section 22 thereof that he was arrested in 
June 1990 for taking indecent liberties with a child. He asserts the charges were 
reduced to furnishing malt liquor to a minor. He served 30 days in jail, served his 
probation, and community service. (Tr. 60, 61; e-QIP in Section 22) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
                                                          
1
 The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Publication 501, Table 1, states a single person under 65 making $10,300 or 
more in 2015 must file an income tax form. The minimum amount rises each year.   
5 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) ¶ 2 (a). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
6 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt and was unable to 
pay some obligations since 2008. Finally, under AG ¶ 19 (g), Applicant “failed to file 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required.” The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose after 2008 when his business and 
employment plans did not succeed and he entered a VA hospital for anxiety and 
depression. He has never earned more than $13,000 since then and his only income 
was from disability payments. He pays no rent or other household expenses because 
he depends on the generosity of women he meets and befriends, to date about four of 
them since 2008. I find the behavior occurred under usual circumstances that it is likely 
to recur based on the pattern of his life since 2008. Applicant has not asserted himself 
since 2008 to become gainfully employed and earn sufficient income to support himself, 
including repaying his debts. It raises concerns about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence does not raise this potentially 
mitigating condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, some of 
the financial problems arose from his medical problems, including the substantial 
medical bills. He did not act responsibly in identifying and resolving these debts. His 
lack of employment is by his own choice. He did have a medical emergency when he 
was hospitalized, but his testimony shows it resulted from feelings of a lack personal 
success as he defined it in his hoped for profession of sound technology. I find this 
potentially mitigating condition is not a factor for consideration in this case.  
 
7 
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). His delinquent debts problems are not under 
control and he has not received financial counseling by his own testimony. This 
mitigating condition does not apply.  
 
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant 
admitted he did not have financial counseling. His delinquent debts are in various 
stages of resolution, if at all. He had three debts deleted from his credit records without 
payment, he paid three other debts, has two medical debts he is paying on an 
installment basis, and has not paid two other debts. This mitigating condition applies to 
the delinquent debts he resolved. There are two debts he has not resolved.  
Finally, his income tax returns are not filed from 2009 to 2015, allegedly because 
his income is too low to require filing. He did not demonstrate he was not required to file 
income tax returns. No mitigating condition applies to the failure to file his tax returns.  
 
Applicant claims he disputed several debts but has not submitted documented 
proof of such actions. Some debts disappeared from his credit record. The burden of 
proof is on Applicant and he did succeed partially in this dispute effort. AG ¶ 20 (e) is 
applicable to debts listed in Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant took a long time to 
address his delinquent debts and file Federal income tax returns. Some debts were 
8 
 
eliminated by deletion from his credit reports, two others remain unpaid, and two are 
being paid on an installment basis. Applicant has not sought employment in eight years 
to be able to resolve his debts. He relies on the generosity of others and his disability 
payments to survive. He shows a lack of initiative and responsibility. His 1990 arrest for 
serving alcohol to a minor is not the action of a responsible person. Even though it was 
not on the SOR, he admitted it in his e-QIP and it can be considered in his whole-
person appraisal.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
