 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02141 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, I conclude that Applicant provided adequate 
information to mitigate security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 3, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 3) After an interview conducted by a security investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on March 12, 2014 (PSI), the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. On August 8, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B. (Item 1) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
 
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 6, 2014. He admitted the one SOR 
allegation that his brother and sister are citizens and residents of Lebanon. He elected 
to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on October 27, 2016. Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on April 11, 2016, and was provided the 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely responded to the FORM providing additional 
information concerning his siblings. I was assigned the case on September 27, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant was born in Lebanon, received his bachelor’s degree from a university in 
Lebanon in August 1982, and arrived in the United States in January 1983 on a student 
visa to pursue graduate studies. He received his master’s degree in 1985 and his 
doctorate in December 1988 from United States universities. In August 1988, he 
married his wife who was also studying at a United States university on a student visa. 
Applicant became a United States citizen in August 1999, and his wife became a United 
States citizen in August 2001. They have three grown children attending college or 
graduate schools in the United States. He has been employed as an aeronautical 
engineer by a defense contractor since 2002. All of his financial assets are in the United 
States. He has no financial interests in Lebanon. Applicant stated that he chose to 
become a citizen of the United States because his loyalties are to the United States. 
(Item 3, e-QIP) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s brother and sister are citizens and residents of 
Lebanon. In 2005, similar facts were alleged as a security concern. At that time, it was 
alleged that his mother and father were residents and citizens of Lebanon, that he 
monetarily helped support his mother and father, that he made five trips to Lebanon 
between 1985 and 2003 to visit his family, and that he was unsure if he would bear 
arms against Lebanon in a conflict between Lebanon and the United States. Applicant 
admitted these allegations. The allegations were considered by an Administrative 
Judge, who determined, after a hearing, that Applicant presented sufficient facts to 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Applicant was granted eligibility for 
access to classified information. (ISCR Case No. 03-26535, AJ Heiny, September 23, 
2005) 
 
The security concern facts of the case have changed since 2005. In the instant 
case, there is only one allegation of foreign influence, that his brother and sister are 
citizens and residents of Lebanon. His parents passed away so he no longer supports 
them. Since 2003, he visited Lebanon twice, in 2008 and 2012. His brother in Lebanon 
is 61 years old and unemployed. He talks to him about once a month by telephone. He 
 
3 
 
 
last saw his brother during his last visit to Lebanon in 2012. His sister is 66 years old 
and a housewife whom he talks to monthly by telephone. He last saw her on his visit in 
2012. Applicant also has a 63-year-old brother who is a citizen and resident of France. 
There is no security allegation against Applicant for his relationship with this brother. 
 
I take administrative notice that Lebanon became an independent country in 
November 1943. From 1975 until 1991, the country experienced civil war followed by 
yeas of political and social instability. It’s neighbor, Syria, used its military forces to be a 
was major influence on Lebanon’s foreign and internal policies from 1976 until 2005. 
Syria withdrew its forces in 2004, and the Lebanon-based Hizballah militia and Israel 
continued to engage in attacks and counterattacks against each other and fought a brief 
war in 2006. Hizballah takes its ideological inspiration from the Iran revolution and is 
closely aligned with Syria. It was designated a Foreign Terrorist Organization in October 
1997. It has a strong influence in Lebanon, and is the most dangerous and prominent 
terrorist group in Lebanon. There are various other terrorist groups operating in 
Lebanon. Syria, designated by the United States in 1979 as a sponsor of terrorism, 
continued to provide weapons and political support to Hizballah. This affected the 
stability in the region.  
 
Lebanon’s security situation deteriorated in 2014 as a result of the spillover from 
violence in Syria.  Lebanon experienced increased violence in 2013-2014 as a result of 
an increase in refugees from Syria. Lebanon is a member of the Global Coalition to 
counter ISIL. The Lebanese Armed Forces seek to limit ISIL’s threat at home, including 
the flow of foreign fighters both to and from Syria. 
 
The most significant human rights violations in Lebanon are torture and abuse by 
security forces; harsh prison and detention center conditions; limitations on freedom of 
movement for Syrian refugees; arbitrary arrest and detention; lengthy pre-trial 
detentions; a judicial system subject to political pressure; long delays in trials; violation 
of citizen privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of speech and the press; official 
corruption and lack of official transparency; widespread violence again women; societal, 
legal and economic discrimination again women; and migrant and child labor abuses. 
The U.S. has issued a travel warning for Lebanon based the ongoing safety and 
security concerns and the potential for death and injury due to the frequency of terrorist 
bombing attacks throughout the country. (Item 7, Administrative Notice request and 
attached documents) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s two siblings are citizens and residents of Lebanon. Applicant has 
monthly telephone contact with them. He sees them on his trips to Lebanon, the last 
one in 2012. Applicant’s contact with family members in Lebanon raises the following 
security concerns under Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion: and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Appellant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can 
have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as 
important to their vital interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress. Lebanon’s present security situation and poor 
human rights record places a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion on Applicant based on his siblings who are citizens and residents 
of Lebanon.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG 8(c) does not apply. There is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, his immediate family members. 
Applicant has not rebutted this presumption. He has weekly or monthly telephone 
conversations with his siblings and occasional visits to Lebanon.1  
 
 Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. Since 2004, Applicant has made 
only two trips to Lebanon, in 2008 and 2012. Applicant’s sense of obligation to his 
siblings in Lebanon is minimal at best. Applicant is a citizen of the United States by 
choice and not by chance and his loyalty is to the United States. Applicant has 
substantial and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. Applicant 
received his graduate and professional education in the United States and has worked 
for the same employer since 2002. He has had access to classified information since 
2005 without any known security violations. His wife and children, are all residents and 
citizens of the United States. His children are attending college or graduate schools in 
the United States. Applicant is a citizen of the United States by choice so his loyalty is to 
the United States. His family in Lebanon are not in positions to create a potential conflict 
of interest between a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion because of the security situation in Lebanon. His brother is 
unemployed and his sister is a housewife. Neither sibling has any connection to the 
government or terrorist groups. In balancing all of these factors, I am satisfied that 
Applicant’s family members in Lebanon are not in positions that make it likely that 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
family members and the interests of the United States. Accordingly, Applicant has met 
his heavy burden to show that his relationships with his family members in Lebanon are 
not a security concern. Appellant has mitigated security concerns for foreign influence 
with the Lebanon. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 09-03144 at 2-3 (App Bd. Oct. 22, 2010 (contact once a month is considered to be 
“frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with his siblings in Lebanon has already been considered 
for security significance, and Applicant was granted access to classified information. In 
the 12 years since Applicant was granted eligibility for access to classified information, 
Applicant and his siblings have not been subject to foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion. Applicant’s contact and relationship with his siblings 
in Lebanon have stayed the same at best and are not close or frequent. His connection 
and loyalty to the United States is stronger than his connection and relationship to 
Lebanon. He does not have a conflict of interest between his obligations to his siblings 
and his duty to protect sensitive and classified information. These facts leave me 
without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated foreign 
influence security concerns based on his family members in Lebanon. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
