1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 14-03261 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on September 27, 2012, seeking eligibility for a public trust position. On April 20, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline E. DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix 
H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Appendix 8 of the Regulation. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 13, 2015, and requested a decision based 
on the record in lieu of a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s case on September 29, 2015. A copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on October 23, 2015, and he was instructed 
to file any objections to the FORM or submit additional matters within 30 days of receipt. 
2 
 
He received the FORM on February 23, 2016, and he did not object to any of the 
materials in the FORM or submit any additional materials. The case was assigned to me 
on November 8, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his e-QIP by stating that a delinquent 
student loan was resolved, when he knew that it was not (SOR ¶ 1.a). In his answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted that he incorrectly answered a question in Section 26 of 
the e-QIP, but denied that he intentionally falsified his answer.  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old assistant operations manager employed by a defense 
contractor since September 2007. He has never held a DOD security clearance or 
eligibility for a public trust position within DOD. 
 
 Applicant attended a technical institute from March 1996 to September 1997 and 
received an associate’s degree in computer aided design. He incurred about $18,000 in 
student loans for his education.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he disclosed student loans totaling about 
$18,000 that became delinquent around May 1999. His pay was garnished for a time 
while he was employed in the private sector. In his e-QIP, he stated that his student 
loans were resolved in January 2012. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he stated 
that he was in the process of resolving his delinquent student loans, but the creditor 
refused to accept payment from an overseas bank. (FORM Item 5.) When Applicant 
was interviewed by a security investigator in February 2014, he still had not resolved his 
delinquent student loans. (FORM Item 6.) In his answer to the SOR, he stated, 
“Payment had been arranged and I believed the issue to be resolved, however, my 
payment from my overseas bank was not accepted by the [government agency].” He 
also stated in his answer that as of July 13, 2015, the date of his answer, all his student 
loans had been paid in full. His May 2014 credit bureau report reflected one student 
loan referred for collection, but it reflected no balance due and no past-due payments. 
(FORM Item 8.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
 
3 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the [adjudication] process or any other failure 
to cooperate with the [adjudication] process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .”  When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of 
4 
 
education are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on an e-QIP was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant is an experienced, well-educated employee. He falsely stated that his 
delinquent student loans had been resolved ten months before his submitted his e-QIP 
in September 2012, knowing that the lender had refused to accept payment from an 
overseas bank. His delinquent loans were not yet resolved when he was interviewed by 
a security investigator in March 2014. AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant made no effort to correct his incorrect 
response until he was confronted with the evidence two years after he submitted his e-
QIP.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s falsification is arguably “infrequent,” but 
it is not minor, because falsification of an e-QIP “strikes at the heart” of the adjudication 
process. ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App .Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) It is not mitigated by the 
passage of time, because it involves his most recent e-QIP. It did not happen under 
unique circumstances, and it raises doubt about his current reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
5 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E and I have considered the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant requested a determination on the record 
without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on 
demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by his personal conduct. Accordingly, 
I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant him eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
