 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04938 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
In 2014, Applicant self-reported his prior marijuana use while in college (five 
times in 2008), and in November 2013, when he used marijuana once while holding a 
public trust position. As of the date of his hearing, Applicant had not used marijuana for 
32 months. He provided a signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. He mitigated personal conduct 
security concerns.1 Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
December 1, 2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative 
decision to grant Applicant a clearance. On December 8, 2015, the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct).2 Applicant answered the SOR 
                                            
1The statement of reasons did not allege a drug involvement security concern. 
 
0.2 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
on January 12, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to me on April 12, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 2, 2016, scheduling a hearing for June 1, 
2016.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits (GE 1 and 2). Applicant 
testified, and submitted six exhibits (AE) 1 through 6. All exhibits were made part of the 
record without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 7, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the two SOR allegations; however, he admitted that in early 
2008, while in college, he experimented with marijuana five times. He also admitted to 
using marijuana in November 2013, while holding a position of trust granted to him in 
2010. His SOR and hearing admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:   
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old cyber security project manager working for several 
federal contractors since 2010. He graduated from high school in 2006, and received a 
bachelor’s degree in 2010. He has never married, and he does not have any children. In 
2010, Applicant was granted a public trust position, which he has held to the present. 
He has worked for his current employer since October 2014. 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana in 2008 when he was a sophomore in college. He 
used marijuana five times from about January to March 2008 at fraternity functions. He 
did not sell or purchase marijuana. Applicant decided to stop using marijuana because 
he was considering going into federal law enforcement, and he did not want to continue 
to associate with the people involved with marijuana.  
 
Section 21 of Applicant’s August 12, 2010 public trust application (PTA) asked 
whether he had used illegal drugs in the previous 12 months, and Applicant answered, 
no. His answer was accurate and truthful because at the time he completed his PTA he 
had not used illegal drugs since about March 2008.  
 
 In November 2013, Applicant claimed he was under stress because of changes 
in his employment; he was moving to a new address; and his mother was having 
serious medical problems. Applicant sought medical assistance and was prescribed an 
anti-anxiety medication which he continues to take to the present. Applicant went to 
another city to visit a friend, and he accepted and used the marijuana she offered to 
him. (Tr. 27) Applicant regretted his decision, describing it as childish and irresponsible. 
(Tr. 27, 33) 
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Applicant is engaged to be married in June 2017. Applicant told his fiancé about 
his marijuana use in November 2013. She does not tolerate illegal drug use, and she 
said their relationship would end if he used marijuana again. He promised his fiancé that 
he would never use marijuana again. He emphasized that he did not want to risk the 
loss of his relationship with his fiancé.  
    
Section 23 of Applicant’s 2014 SCA asked about Applicant’s illegal drug use in 
the previous seven years. He disclosed that he first used marijuana in January 2008, 
and most recently used marijuana in November 2013. He used marijuana five to seven 
times in the previous seven years. In regard to future illegal drug use, he indicated, “I do 
not intend to do anything that would interfere with obtaining further security clearances.” 
He believed his answers on his December 1, 2014 SCA were truthful and accurate. He 
did not use marijuana after November 2013. (Tr. 32)  
   
 In March 2016, Applicant received a substance abuse evaluation from Ms. B, 
who is a Licensed Social Worker (LSW), Certified Substance Abuse Counselor (CSAC), 
Licensed Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). She described Applicant as having 
sincere remorse about his marijuana use, excellent insight, and above average 
intelligence. (AE 1) She concluded there was “a very low probability of a substance 
abuse disorder,” no treatment was warranted, and there was no risk of relapse. (AE 1) 
 
 Applicant provided a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any future use of illegal drugs. He does not associate with anyone that 
currently uses marijuana. Applicant has disclosed his marijuana involvement to some of 
his closest friends. 
 
On September 6, 2013, a manager wrote thanking Applicant for his “excellent 
service, support rendered, and passionate participation” as well as for his “active 
involvement and enthusiastic contributions to our overall goal.” Applicant provided 
seven statements from Applicant’s friends and coworkers who have known him for 5 to 
14 years. They lauded Applicant’s exemplary character, trustworthiness, reliability, 
honesty, loyalty, and thoughtfulness. Their statements support approval of his access to 
classified information. (AE 5) 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. Applicant refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b that 
he failed to disclose his marijuana use on his 2010 PTA. He denied that he used 
marijuana within 12 months of completing his PTA, and there is no evidence to the 
contrary. AG ¶ 16(d) is not established. Applicant’s marijuana use is explicitly covered 
under the drug involvement guideline. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) apply. Applicant used and possessed marijuana on about 
five occasions in 2008 while he was in college. He also illegally used marijuana in 
November 2013, while holding a public trust position. In ISCR Case No. 12-00609 at 6 
(App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014), the Appeal Board emphasized the importance of the applicant’s 
security clearance and employment status when the criminal conduct was committed 
stating:  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A reasonable person could find [a]pplicant’s behavior to have been 
reckless and incompatible with his claims of rehabilitation and good 
judgment. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-00391 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 
2011) (A pre-employment drug test should have placed the applicant on 
notice that drug use was incompatible with his employment. The 
applicant’s use of marijuana after this test suggests a lack of willingness to 
follow rules and regulations); see also ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 27, 2008) (Use of marijuana after having submitted an SCA 
undercuts the applicant's promise to avoid such conduct in the future). The 
Judge’s failure to address this aspect of the case impairs his whole-person 
analysis. 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use while holding a public trust position showed poor 
judgment. His marijuana use adversely affected his personal, professional, and 
community standing and accordingly, this information creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case including: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses: (1) are not 
recent; (2) are infrequent; or (3) happened under such unique circumstances that the 
circumstances are unlikely to recur. If any of the three criteria apply, then the drug 
offenses may not cast doubt on the Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” 
The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record 
within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without 
any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”3 
 
Applicant used marijuana five times during a short period in early 2008 and then 
stopped using marijuana; his marijuana use recurred in November 2013; and he has not 
used marijuana again. Applicant credibly resolved not to use marijuana in the future. He 
abstained from marijuana use for about 31 months. He recognized the adverse impact 
                                            
3ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated: 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the 
administrative judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 11-00193 at 2-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 24, 2013) (reversing grant of security clearance 
for applicant who refrained from marijuana use for two years because he had used marijuana with varying 
degrees of frequency for 21 years; he used marijuana while holding a security clearance; and he made 
inconsistent statements); ISCR Case No. 06-18905 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2007) (reversing grant of 
security clearance where applicant holding a security clearance used marijuana “two and a half years 
prior to the hearing” and he made inconsistent statements about his history of marijuana use and his 
intentions of using marijuana in the future). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of drug abuse in connection with access to classified information and on his relationship 
with his fiancé. He also understands that possession of marijuana violates federal law. 
AG ¶ 17(c) applies to his marijuana-related conduct.     
 
Applicant has completed a sustained period of abstinence, and he provided “a 
signed statement of intent [not to use illegal drugs] with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.” See generally AG ¶ 26(b) (this drug involvement mitigating 
condition is not directly applicable; however, it is an indication of the importance in the 
Directive of this mitigating factor in the assessment of drug-related conduct).    
 
AG ¶ 17(d) partially applies. Applicant acknowledged his illegal marijuana 
possession and use, and he sought an assessment (not counseling) from Ms. B. He is 
taking medication to relieve stress, and he has the support of his fiancé to refrain from 
future marijuana use. Applicant’s has not been involved in drug abuse counseling. Ms. B 
indicated his marijuana abuse was so limited such counseling was unnecessary. 
Applicant’s future marijuana use is unlikely to recur. 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) applies. Applicant has eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by disclosing his marijuana use on his 2014 SCA, to his fiancé, 
and to some of his close friends. He promised to refrain from future marijuana use.  
 
In sum, the only evidence of Applicant’s marijuana use is his self-report during the 
security clearance process. His November 2013 marijuana use occurred while he was 
holding a public trust position. He provided a signed statement of intent not to use illegal 
drugs with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. He did not make any 
inconsistent statements about his history of marijuana use or about his intention to not 
use marijuana in the future. He has abstained from marijuana use for 31 months 
(November 2013 to June 2016, the date of his hearing), demonstrating a sufficient track 
record of no drug abuse to mitigate personal conduct security concerns.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old cyber security project manager working for a federal 
contractor since October 2014. In 2010, after graduating from college, he was granted a 
public trust position, which he has held to the present. Applicant’s employer considers 
him to be an excellent employee who has made significant contributions to the 
employer’s goals. Applicant’s friends and coworkers lauded his exemplary character, 
trustworthiness, reliability, honesty, loyalty, and thoughtfulness. Their statements 
support approval of his access to classified information.  
 
Applicant used marijuana five times in 2008, and once in November 2013. He 
self-reported his marijuana use in his 2014 SCA. His November 2013 marijuana use 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
occurred while he was holding a public trust position and showed very poor judgment. 
He ended his marijuana use in November 2013, and his marijuana use is not recent. His 
fiancé supports his abstention from illegal drug use. He sincerely and credibly assures 
he will not use marijuana in the future, and he provided a signed statement of intent not 
to use illegal drugs with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. Applicant 
mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
