 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08592 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 23, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 24, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 16, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 19, 2016. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. I held the record open until October 27, 2016, 
to permit Applicant an opportunity to provide additional documents, which he did. They 
are marked as AE F through H, and admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He is a high school graduate and attended college full 
time in 2002 for one year. He resumed his college studies in 2009 to 2011. He has not 
earned a degree. He married in May 2016 and has three stepsons, ages 16, 14 and 11. 
His wife receives child support. She is employed. Applicant served in the military from 
1997 to August 2001, when he was honorably discharged. Applicant worked from July 
2006 to April 2014, but voluntarily left this employment because he wanted a healthier 
environment. He was unemployed from April 2014 to August 2015. He indicated he 
worked helping his brother during this time. He has been employed by a federal 
contractor since August 2015.1 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to a rough couple of years he 
experienced. He had surgery on his hand, but he continued to be paid by his employer. 
He suffered from depression and was on medication. He moved to another state in 
anticipation of a job, but it was not what he thought it would be. He returned home to be 
with his brother who had post-traumatic stress disorder. His brother provided him 
financial support until September 2015. A credit report from August 2015 supports the 
debts alleged.2 
 
 Applicant purchased a vehicle in 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.a - $8,818). He made payments 
for four years. When he left his employment in 2014, he could not afford to make the 
payments. He testified that he received a loan extension, but he could not pay what was 
owed. He sold the car in 2014 for $500 and kept the money. He did not pay the 
creditor.3 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($656) is for a credit card placed in collection. Applicant 
admitted he defaulted on the card in April 2014. He used the credit card to pay other 
debts. He has not contacted the creditor or made any payments on the card.4  
                                                          
1 Tr. 15-20. 
 
2 Tr. 53-60; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. 32-39. 
 
4 Tr. 39-41. 
 
3 
 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($27,345) is for a student loan Applicant obtained in 2002. 
He testified he had no idea how much the loan was for. He believed he had 
scholarships, federal funds, and private loans that were funding his education. He 
attended college for a year and he got sick. He had a difficult time adjusting to living by 
himself. He moved back home. The loans were in forbearance for a period, and he 
made sporadic payments. He testified that in about 2006, he began working, and he 
made payments of $200 a month for one year. He stopped making the payments 
because he thought he originally owed $18,000 and it had increased to $22,000, even 
though he was making payments. He discussed the loan with the creditor, but disagreed 
with the amount owed. He testified he could not afford to pay the loan, so he stopped. 
He has not made any effort to repay the loan from 2007 to 2016.5  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($981) is a cell phone debt. He stopped paying the bill in 
2014 when he left his job. The services were discontinued. He did not attempt to pay 
the delinquent bill.6  
 
 In April 2016, Applicant contacted an attorney. His attorney recommended he file 
bankruptcy. Applicant has additional delinquent debts that are not included in the SOR, 
including a repossessed vehicle for which he owes approximately $7,000. He estimated 
he had about $30,000 of debts and his wife has about $60,000, which includes medical 
and consumer debts.7 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2016. His bankruptcy 
attorney recently contacted the creditor for the student loan, so the information could be 
included with his bankruptcy. Applicant believes his student loan is with a private 
creditor and will be included with his bankruptcy. He completed the mandatory financial 
counseling requirements in September 2016. He has a budget. His debts have not yet 
been discharged. It is unknown what debts will be discharged and when.8 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he made poor financial decisions in the past. He is 
responsible for his actions and wants to do the right thing. He understands he may have 
been reckless and wants to fix his errors so he can provide a better life for his family. He 
testified that if the attorney had not recommended he file bankruptcy, he would have 
made payments on his debts to get his finances in order.9 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 20-31. 
 
6 Tr. 41-42. 
 
7 Tr. 49-50. I have not considered for disqualifying purposes the additional delinquent debts that were not 
alleged in SOR. I will consider them when considering mitigation and the whole person.  
 
8 Tr. 29-31, 43-48, 68-70; AE A., D, E, G, H. 
 
9 Tr. 43, 55, 73; AE F. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant provided two character letters. In them he is described as dependable, 
reliable, and hard-working. He has a good work ethic and a solid attendance record. He 
also works well with customers, peers, and supervisors.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
10 AE B, C.  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has financial delinquencies that are unpaid or resolved. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant disagreed with the balance he owed on a student loan. He never 
resolved the dispute with the creditor. He stopped making payments and abandoned the 
debt in 2007. He has not contacted the creditor, but stated his attorney did. Applicant 
experienced financial problems after he voluntarily left his job in 2014. He has not made 
payments towards his debts. After he received the SOR, he contacted an attorney and 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. It is unknown what debts are included in the bankruptcy. 
There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶ 20(a) as Applicant’s debts are recent, 
multiple and not resolved. His financial difficulties did not occur under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 In April 2014, Applicant left his job voluntarily because he wanted to be in a 
healthier environment. This was a decision within his control. He was unable to pay his 
debts. He did not provide evidence that once he began working again in August 2015 
that he addressed his delinquent debts. He did not contact a bankruptcy attorney until 
after he received the SOR. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because the conditions were 
within his control and he did not act responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant completed the financial counseling required to file bankruptcy. He 
stated he has a budget. There is evidence that he filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, but the 
debts have not been discharged. Although bankruptcy is a legal means to resolve 
debts, it does not constitute a good-faith effort to repay one’s creditors or show 
responsible conduct regarding one’s finances. Only the first part of AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
There are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are resolved or under 
control. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he disputed the balance he owed on his student loan that 
he had made monthly payments on in 2006. He did not resolve the dispute with the 
creditor. He stopped paying the loan and has not had contact with the creditor since at 
least 2007. He indicated his bankruptcy attorney contacted the creditor. He believes this 
is a private student loan and will be included in his bankruptcy. No additional information 
is provided about this debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old veteran. He voluntarily left his job in 2014. When he 
began working again in August 2015, he did not address his delinquent debts. After 
receiving the SOR, he and his wife filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. It is unknown what debts 
will be discharged. His debts are not resolved. Applicant does not have a reliable track 
record of acting responsibly toward his financial obligations. Applicant’s conduct raises 
questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations guideline security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
