   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-03227 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges six delinquent debts including a 
mortgage account. While circumstances beyond his control damaged his finances, he 
did not provide enough documented progress paying his debts to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.       
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On July 23, 2014, Applicant completed and signed his Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On February 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 
2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
   
 
2 
 
 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). 
 
On March 10, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On July 8, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 1, 2016, the case was assigned 
to me. On August 29, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for September 12, 2016. (HE 1)  
Applicant did not appear for his hearing. He was contacted at home; he elected to waive 
his right to a video teleconference or in-person hearing; and Applicant selected 
teleconference as the presentation media for his security clearance hearing. (Tr. 10) 
Applicant waived his right under the Directive to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and 
location of his hearing. (Tr. 10-11) The hearing was conducted as scheduled. 
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 18-19; 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4) On September 20, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the 
transcript of the hearing. Applicant was authorized until October 12, 2016, to submit 
post-hearing evidence. (Tr. 33) Applicant did not submit any post-hearing 
documentation. (HE 4, 5) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations. He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old security specialist. (Tr. 6; GE 1) In 2004, he graduated 
from high school. (Tr. 6) In 2008, he joined the Army Reserve, and he served on active 
duty from 2009 to 2012. (Tr. 6, 25) He remained in the Army Reserve after leaving 
active duty. (Tr. 6) His military occupational specialty (MOS) is combat engineer (12B). 
(Tr. 6) He is a sergeant (E-5) (Tr. 6)  
 
In 2009, he married, and in 2013, he divorced. (Tr. 7) He had one child from his 
first marriage, who is now five years old. (Tr. 22) In 2015, he married. (Tr. 7) He has 
three children in his household, who are ages 5 years (stepchild), 18 months, and two 
months. (Tr. 8, 23) He has a six-year-old child from a non-marital relationship. (Tr. 24) 
He does not abuse illegal drugs, and there is no evidence of security violations. (GE 1)  
 
  
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits. 
   
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s spouse, who was employed in the Air National Guard, was placed on 
bed rest during her pregnancy, and Applicant took leave under the Family Medical 
Leave of Absence (FMLA) program to care for their children. (Tr. 20, 28) While he was 
on FMLA, he was not receiving pay, and his debts became delinquent. (Tr. 21) After his 
spouse had a baby, he resumed making payments to his creditors. (Tr. 21) 
 
After leaving active Army service, Applicant attended college, and he lived on his 
VA benefits. (Tr. 26) In 2014, he obtained employment in security. (Tr. 26) He went on 
FMLA for about a year, and in December 2015, he obtained another security job. (Tr. 
27) When his spouse works for the Air National Guard, Applicant stays home with their 
children. (Tr. 28-29) He works in his security employment on evenings and weekends 
while she watches the children. (Tr. 29) He has about $400 monthly, after a recent 
reduction in his child support responsibilities, remaining to pay his debts. (Tr. 30) 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his SCA, credit reports, 
SOR response, and hearing record. The status of his SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a mortgage account with past-due monthly payments totaling  
$129,080 on a balance of $190,471. In 2007, Applicant purchased a residence in an 
urban area. (Tr. 47) In 2008 or 2009, Applicant left the residence; in 2009, he and his 
spouse separated; and in about 2010, she left the residence. (Tr. 47-48) The monthly 
payment was $1,700, and Applicant used the Servicemember’s Civil Relief Act to block 
the creditor from resolving the debt. (Tr. 49) No payments were made for about six 
years. (Tr. 49) Eventually, Applicant attempted to sell his home through a short sale; he 
offered a deed in lieu of foreclosure; and when those actions were unsuccessful, the 
home was sold at auction in July or August 2016. (Tr. 31-32, 49-51) After the auction he 
believed he owed over $100,000 to the creditor. (Tr. 34) Applicant said he had the 
documentation from the auction sale, and he would provide it after the hearing. (Tr. 32) 
Department Counsel and I emphasized the importance of Applicant providing 
documentation showing efforts to resolve the debt and to show the magnitude and 
status of the debt. (Tr. 33, 43, 52, 59-60) 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a child support debt placed for collection for $6,001. 
Applicant’s SOR response indicates on March 1, 2016, the child support arrearage was 
$7,071; the monthly payment was $535; and the monthly arrearage payment was $65. 
Applicant said that on August 22, 2016, he went to court to contest his child support 
debt. (Tr. 17) The judge reduced the delinquency by $3,000, and he reduced the 
monthly payment from $595 to $200. (Tr. 17) Department Counsel requested that 
Applicant provide the documentation showing a reduction in his child support debt such 
as the court order he alluded to during his statement. (Tr. 35, 43) He did not provide 
evidence of his child support payments. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a DOD debt placed for collection for $255. SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.e allege two Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) debts placed for collection for 
   
 
4 
 
 
$1,221 and $2,430. Applicant believed the debts were associated with failing a class 
funded by the VA or DOD. (Tr. 35-38, 39-40) Applicant’s SOR response included a 
February 8, 2016 letter from the VA indicating a payment plan was scheduled to begin 
on February 28, 2016, with monthly $150 payments. Applicant said he was complying 
with the $150 monthly payment plan. (Tr. 40) Department Counsel acknowledged that 
the documentation of record provided a basis for concluding the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.e were duplications of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, and he emphasized the importance 
of receipt of documentary evidence of the claimed $150 monthly payments. (Tr. 40-41, 
43) No documentary evidence of payments to the VA was provided.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a charged-off credit card debt for $4,198. Applicant’s SOR 
response included a February 10, 2016 letter from the creditor acknowledging receipt of 
$150 and indicating a monthly payment plan was established with monthly $150 
payments. He said he was paying $150 monthly to address this debt. (Tr. 39) The 
balance of the debt is $5,207. (SOR response) Department Counsel requested 
documentation showing additional payments on the SOR ¶ 1.f debt such as bank 
statements showing debits from his account. (Tr. 43-47)   
 
Applicant did not receive financial counseling. (Tr. 42) Applicant did not provide 
any documentation showing any payments to address any of the debts in the statement 
of reasons, except for one $150 payment to the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.f.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
   
 
5 
 
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
   
 
6 
 
 
is documented in his SCA, credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
   
 
7 
 
 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant presented some important mitigating information. Several 
circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances. Applicant was 
unemployed or underemployed for several years. His spouse was on bed rest during 
her pregnancy. However, he did not provide enough specifics about how these 
circumstances adversely affected his finances, and he did not show that he acted 
responsibly to address his delinquent SOR debts during the last five years.       
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e are mitigated as duplications of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. He is 
not credited with mitigating the other SOR debts because he did not provide sufficient 
documentation showing progress paying the debts or a reasonable dispute of any 
debts, such as copies of letters to the SOR creditors and credit reporting companies 
disputing his responsibility for any debts. The only evidence of payments was a letter 
indicating he made one $150 payment to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why he was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving any of his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance 
that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in 
the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
   
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old security specialist. In 2004, he graduated from high 
school. In 2008, he joined the Army Reserve, and he served on active duty from 2009 to 
2012. He remained in the Army Reserve after leaving active duty, and he is a sergeant. 
His MOS is combat engineer. In 2015, he married, and he has five children under the 
age of seven. He does not abuse illegal drugs, and there is no evidence of security 
violations. Applicant is credited with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e.  
 
The disqualification evidence is more persuasive. Applicant has a lengthy history 
of delinquent debt. Applicant’s mortgage has been delinquent for five years. He 
estimated that he owed $100,000 on the mortgage debt after the residence was 
auctioned. He also had delinquent debts owed for a credit card, child support, and to the 
VA. He did not provide copies of his tax returns, which would have documented his 
changes in income; he did not show that he acted responsibly to address his delinquent 
debts; he did not show how he reduced his expenses to conform with reductions in his 
income; he did not provide a current budget; he did not provide documentation showing 
a reasonable dispute of any SOR debts; he did not provide documented payment 
histories of non-SOR debts such as his rent or mortgage, student loans, vehicle loan, 
and credit card accounts. His failure to make greater documented progress resolving his 
SOR debts and to provide that documentation for inclusion in the record evidence 
shows lack of responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See 
AG ¶ 18. More documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. It is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility at this time.  
   
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
