 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01357 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns for six 
consecutive years and acquired an undetermined debt to the IRS and his state. He failed 
to show financial responsibility. His evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline F 
(financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 3, 2012. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a clearance. On September 27, 2015, the DOD issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on December 28, 2015, and requested a 
decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), was mailed to 
Applicant on February 26, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on March 7, 2016. He was 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit 
any additional evidence. The case was assigned to me on November 21, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted the two SOR factual allegations – that he 
failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2006 through 2011. 
His two-page letter in response to the SOR provided some explanations and extenuating 
and mitigating information. Applicant’s SOR admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1971 and enlisted in the U.S. Air Force that same year, where he served 
until being honorably discharged in May 1975. While in the service, Applicant’s duties 
required him to possess a top secret level clearance. He believed he was granted his 
clearance in May 1972, and held it until his discharge. Applicant married his first wife in 
1979 and divorced in 1990. He married his current wife in 1993. He has a 23-year-old 
son. 
 
Applicant has been continuously working for his employer, a large federal 
telecommunications contractor, since 1977. He is a senior advanced technical support 
specialist. There is no evidence to show he has had periods of unemployment or 
underemployment. It is not clear whether his continued employment is contingent on his 
eligibility for a clearance. There are no allegations or evidence of any rule or security 
violations.   
 
In his answers to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his 2012 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that during the past seven years he had failed to timely file and pay his federal 
and state income taxes for tax years 2006 through 2011. The subsequent security 
clearance background investigation addressed his failure to timely file his income tax 
returns. 
 
Applicant was interviewed in November 2012 by a government investigator and 
discussed his failure to timely file his tax returns. Applicant explained that in 2005-2006, 
his wife had medical problems related to a fall and required rehabilitative treatment. He 
did not file his income tax return that year because he was distracted with his wife’s 
medical problems. After skipping that year, it was more difficult for him to file because the 
tax filing program he was using required the prior year tax information. Thereafter, he did 
not file because he kept putting it off. Applicant knew he was required by law to file his 
income tax returns. He estimated his total tax delinquency to be between $10,000 and 
$20,000. 
 
Applicant also told the government investigator that his financial situation was 
stable and he had no financial problems. He believed he was capable of meeting his 
financial obligations, and had not sought financial counseling. Applicant has provided no 
information about his current financial position. He did not provide any information about 
 
3 
                                         
 
his income, monthly expenses, or whether his current income is sufficient to pay his 
current living expenses and debts.  
 
In his December 2015 answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed he had filed his 
income tax returns for tax years 2006 through 2011 with his 2012 tax return, and that he 
was current up to tax year 2012. He did not provide any documentary evidence to support 
his claims. Applicant also stated that he had failed to file his federal and state income tax 
returns “since 2013”.  
 
Applicant explained that “LIFE” had prevented him from filing his tax returns. He 
stated that providing and caring for his family was very important to him. He explained 
that his wife retired, but she continued to have chronic medical problems. His son dropped 
out of college and is living with him. Applicant claimed he hired the services of a tax 
accountant to help him bring his tax returns current. He and his accountant were waiting 
for the electronic filing system to come back online to file his returns. Applicant did not 
provide documentary evidence to show he has filed any of his past-due federal and state 
income tax returns, or that he retained a tax accountant to help him file his late tax returns.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
 
4 
                                         
 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2006 
through 2011 is documented in his 2012 SCA, 2012 interview, and in his SOR response. 
AG ¶ 19 provides a disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” 
 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and 
(g) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
5 
                                         
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. He presented no evidence to show that he 
has filed any of his delinquent income tax returns. There is no evidence to show that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant presented no documentary 
evidence of efforts taken to contact the IRS or state tax authorities to file his income tax 
returns or pay his past-due taxes. In sum, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to 
show financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the Air 
Force four years, and held a security clearance. He has worked for a defense contractor 
since 1977.  
 
Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to show he has filed his federal and 
state income tax returns since 2006. There is insufficient evidence of progress addressing 
 
6 
                                         
 
Applicant’s financial problems. The available information is insufficient to establish clear 
indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial problems 
are being resolved, or are under control. Applicant failed to establish that he has a track 
record of financial responsibility. For the above stated reasons, I find that the financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
