  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-03179
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred significant delinquent or past-due debt due, in large measure,
to a divorce and a long period of unemployment. Although he satisfied all but one of the
eight civil judgments against him, numerous other debts remain unresolved. Applicant
also has not filed his federal and state income tax returns for the past five tax years as
required. Finally, Applicant deliberately omitted from his most recent security clearance
application relevant adverse financial information in his background. He did not present
information sufficient to mitigate the resulting security concerns about his finances and
personal conduct. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On July 15, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a security clearance.  1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 At Department Counsel’s request, I have included, as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1, a copy of the March 16, 20163
letter that forwarded Gx. 1 - 3 to Applicant, in accordance with Directive Section E3.1.13. Also included, as
Hx. 2, is a list identifying those exhibits.
 No dollar amount was specified for the debts alleged at SOR 1.d - 1.g.4
2
On December 12, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guidelines  for2
financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). Applicant
timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned me on May 18, 2016, and I convened a hearing on June 27, 2016. The parties
appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 -
3.  Applicant testified in his own behalf. A transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on3
July 6, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed at least4
$74,500 for 26 delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.z). It also was alleged that
Applicant deliberately made a false official statement when he submitted his EQIP but
omitted the civil judgment debts alleged at SOR 1.h - 1.o. In response, Applicant
admitted all of the SOR allegations (Answer). 
At the hearing, Applicant disclosed that he has not filed federal or state income
tax returns as required since 2011, when he filed his returns for the 2010 tax year.
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform with the evidence, as
allowed by Section E3.1.17 of the Directive. I granted the Government’s motion without
objection from Applicant. Accordingly, the following allegation was added to the SOR as
subparagraph 1.aa under Guideline F:
You failed to file your federal and state tax returns for tax years 2011
through 2015, as required.
Applicant was afforded an opportunity at the hearing to respond to the new
allegation. He admitted SOR 1.aa. (Tr. 69 - 71) In addition to the facts established by
Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 66 years old and works for a defense contractor as an instructor.
Applicant was hired for that position in April 2014 after having been unemployed since
September 2011. For a year before that, he worked for a defense contractor but the
contract on which he was working expired and he lost his job. From May 2001 until
August 2011, Applicant was a manager in a large telecommunications corporation, but
was laid off during a corporate downsizing after he declined to take a position for
significantly less pay. (Gx. 1; Tr. 64 - 65)
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from March 1973 until retiring as a master
sergeant in August 2001. He held a security clearance throughout most of his military
career. His current application was submitted because his clearance lapsed after he
retired. (Gx. 1; Tr. 5 - 6) 
3
Applicant was married from August 1973 until June 2010, when he divorced. He
has three grown children, one of whom is a single mother to whom Applicant provides
occasional financial assistance. After he and his ex-wife separated in about 2009,
Applicant was obligated to pay his ex-wife about $3,000 each month. She still receives
half of his military retired pay and half of his social security benefit. (Gx. 1; Tr. 19, 43 -
44, 63 - 65)
Applicant incurred most of the debts alleged in the SOR while he and his ex-wife
were divorcing and while he was unemployed. The two largest debts (SOR 1.i and 1.n)
were debts enforced by civil judgments to collect the remainders due from delinquent
car loans after the collateral vehicles were repossessed and resold. Although Applicant
has satisfied both judgments, he believes SOR 1.n actually represents a car loan
attributable to his son, who is Applicant’s namesake. Applicant did not present any
information to support this claim. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Tr. 18, 31, 36 - 37)
The allegations at SOR 1.h - 1.o were for debts being enforced by civil judgments
against Applicant. The credit report at Gx.3 shows, and the Government has conceded,
that all but one (SOR 1.m) were satisfied between 2009 and 2013. Applicant has not
resolved SOR 1.m because he does not have enough information or money to do so.
Applicant also has not resolved the debts at SOR 1.a - 1.g and 1.p - 1.z. (Answer; Gx.
1- 3; Tr. 39 - 42)
Not long after he was hired for his current job in 2014, Applicant enlisted the
services of a credit-repair company. For $80 monthly, that company researches entries
in Applicant’s credit history to help Applicant verify accounts. The service does not
counsel Applicant about financial management or help him set up payment plans for his
debts. (Tr. 49 - 50, 65 - 66)
Applicant is currently meeting all of his regular monthly expenses and he has not
incurred any new unpaid debts. After expenses, he has less than $500 remaining each
month. In the course of his testimony about his current financial condition, he revealed
that he has not filed his federal or state income tax returns as required since 2011,
when he filed his tax year 2010 returns. He stated that the IRS has contacted him about
his past-due filings, but he has not yet taken any action to bring his filing status up to
date. (Tr. 45 - 59)
The only adverse financial information Applicant disclosed when he submitted his
EQIP were the debts at SOR 1.e and 1.i. He did not disclose the civil judgments alleged
at SOR 1.h - 1.o even though he had appeared in court to answer at least one of the
underlying lawsuits against him. The EQIP question at issue was part of Section 26
(Financial Record) required disclosure of any judgments entered against him in the
previous seven years (in this case, since 2014). Although Applicant held a security
clearance for over 20 years in the Army, he claimed he misunderstood the question,
thinking it addressed criminal matters. He also testified that his omissions resulted from
being rushed to complete the EQIP. In response to another question in EQIP Section
26, Applicant did not disclose in his EQIP his failure to file tax returns after 2011.
(Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 36 - 39, 60)
 See Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
4
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.8
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting
financial obligations); and 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). Applicant’s financial problems
began around the time he and his wife separated in 2009. While he resolved several
debts between 2009 and 2013, as many as 19 other debts remain unpaid. He also has
failed to file his federal and state income tax returns since tax year 2010.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
AG ¶ 20(a) is not available to Applicant as he still has at least 19 unresolved
delinquencies. The mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) are partially
applicable here. Applicant’s debts arose from a period of unemployment that occurred
not long after his divorce was finalized. He also acted to resolve all but one of the civil
judgment debts against him. However, his current finances do not reflect an ability to
resolve his remaining debts and there is no record of any recent action to contact
creditors or otherwise pay his remaining debts. Although Applicant is using a credit-
6
repair company to get information about his credit history, he is not receiving counseling
or other assistance that may result in paying off his past-due debts. Finally, Applicant
has not addressed his past-due income tax filings despite being contacted by the IRS.
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable here.
 As to AG ¶ 20(e), Applicant implied that one or more debts attributable to him
may actually belong to his son. However, Applicant did not present any corroboration of
this claim. On balance, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns
raised by the Government’s information about his finances.
Personal Conduct
The record evidence as a whole shows that Applicant deliberately omitted from
his EQIP relevant adverse information about his finances. While he disclosed two of the
debts in his background, the Government’s information and an assessment of all of the
circumstances regarding Applicant’s intent at the time he completed the EQIP persuade
me he knew he was required, yet decided not to disclose the civil judgments alleged at
SOR 1.h - 1.o. The EQIP question at issue is straightforward and requires disclosure of
judgments in the preceding seven years, even if they had been satisfied at the time the
EQIP was completed. I also considered as probative of Applicant’s intent his conflicting
explanations for why he omitted the information. Applicant stated initially that he did not
understand the question at issue, thinking it addressed criminal matters. This is not
tenable given his experience with applying for security clearances in the Army, and
because the question is one of several squarely addressed in the EQIP section
regarding financial matters. Later in the hearing, Applicant testified he was rushed in
completing the EQIP. Neither claim was credible. Further, even though it was not
alleged in the SOR, the fact that Applicant also did not disclose his failure to file his
income tax returns after 2011 is relevant, in that, it is a circumstance that tends to show
that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate. 
All of the foregoing reasonably raises a security concern about Applicant’s
judgment and trustworthiness that is expressed at AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 16(a):
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
I also considered the following AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
7
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Available information does not support application of any of these adjudicative
factors. On balance, I conclude the security concerns under this guideline have not
been mitigated. 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant did not present any information about his reputation in the
workplace or community, and little is known about his military service apart from the fact
that he was honorably discharged after a 28-year career as a senior noncommissioned
officer. While his military service is an important factor in this adjudication, without more,
significant doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified
information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these
adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.aa: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
