 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02931 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 12, 2016, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 12, 2016, setting the hearing for 
June 15, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 6 which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
 
2 
 
Government’s discovery letter, which contained an exhibit list, was marked as a hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. HE II is the official Government publication from which I took 
administrative notice (See footnote 4). Applicant testified, but did not offer any exhibits 
at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
evidence. He submitted Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A and B. Those exhibits were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 24, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and has worked for his current government contractor-
employer since 2012. He is a high school graduate. He is single with no children. He 
served in the Air Force from 2001 to 2006, when he was honorably discharged. He 
deployed to Iraq during his service. He has held a security clearance in the past.1  
 
 In his answer, Applicant admitted the sole allegation that he owed approximately 
$95,800 for his 2009 – 2011 federal income tax debt. He explained that he worked out a 
payment plan with the IRS and was making payments under that plan.2  
 
 Applicant explained that from 2007 through 2011, he worked for various federal 
contractors at several overseas locations. His taxable income for years 2009 through 
2011, respectively, was $143,410; $163,365; and $74,465. While he was deployed, he 
hired a tax preparer located in the city where he resided. This tax preparer was 
recommended by some of his coworkers who were deployed with him and experienced 
similar income and work environments. Applicant used this tax preparer to file his 2009 
through his 2011 tax returns. Initially, he received refunds from the IRS for tax year 
2009 in the amount of approximately $21,000 and for 2010 in the amount of 
approximately $22,000. He expected to also receive a sizable refund for 2011, and 
when he did not in the expected timeframe, he contacted the IRS and was told he owed 
approximately $58,000. He was shocked by this news, based upon his recent receipt of 
refunds.3  
 
 Applicant went back to his tax preparer for an explanation, but did not receive 
one. He also contacted a tax advocate firm for assistance, but again he was unsatisfied 
with the information. He was not working at this time and was forced to change 
locations and live with family members to make ends meet. He eventually hired a tax 
attorney to contest the IRS determination. He was informed that his tax preparer had 
claimed an exemption for foreign income credit that Applicant was not entitled to claim. I 
took administrative notice that in March 2015, the Department of Justice (DOJ) sought 
to enjoin this tax preparer “from preparing federal tax returns that contain or involve 
foreign earned income, and from promoting to others the exclusion of foreign earned 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 18, 33, 54; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-23; GE 2 (See taxpayer account transcripts for 2009-2011). 
 
 
3 
 
income.”4 DOJ determined from 2009 to 2012, the tax preparer prepared approximately 
800 returns claiming the foreign earned income exclusion. Once Applicant was made 
aware of the errors made by his tax preparer by claiming the tax exemption he was not 
entitled to claim, he directed his tax attorney to stop contesting the IRS determination 
and work out a payment plan with the agency.5  
 
 Applicant began making $400 monthly payments to the IRS in June 2015, before 
the SOR was issued. He provided documentation of those payments made 
electronically through his bank. Many of Applicant’s coworkers who used the same tax 
preparer have found themselves in similar situations. Applicant recognized that 
ultimately it was his responsibility to insure his income tax returns were correct when he 
filed them. He intends to pay all his tax debt. He filed his 2012 through 2014 federal tax 
returns and owes no tax liability for those years. Other than his tax debt, he has no 
delinquent obligations. His personal financial statement reflects that he has accounted 
for his monthly IRS payment within his budget. He received financial counseling from 
his tax attorney6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
4 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod 
v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Neither party objected to 
my noticing the facts from Hearing Exhibit (HE) II. See Tr. at 50-52. 
 
5 Tr. at 27-28; GE 2 (See IRS Notice dated October 14, 2015). 
 
6 Tr. at 28, 30, 32, 37, 45, 52; GE 2; AE A, B. 
 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Due to his tax preparer’s error, Applicant owed federal taxes for years 2009 to 
2011. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply.  
 
5 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant accrued tax liability because his tax preparer illegitimately claimed a 
foreign earned income exemption Applicant was not entitled to claim. This error resulted 
in significant tax liability for Applicant for tax years 2009 to 2011. Applicant acted 
responsibly when he discovered that the tax preparer had erred. He directed his tax 
attorney to negotiate a payment plan with the IRS. He has made monthly payments of 
$400 since June 2015. He is in good standing with all his other debts and received 
financial counseling. He is resolving his tax debt, and that debt was due to his tax 
preparer’s error, which is unlikely to recur. Overall, the evidence does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 
20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and his federal contractor service, 
including his overseas deployments in both circumstances. I found Applicant to be 
honest and candid; although somewhat gullible, about the circumstances that led to his 
tax issues. He took appropriate and timely action to resolve his taxes and pay his tax 
debt once he realized what the problem was. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find 
himself in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
