                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-03512
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 4, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On January 19, 2016, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was assigned to
this AJ on March 28, 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 30, 2016, and
the hearing was held as scheduled on April 20, 2016. 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits
A and B, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of
the hearing (Tr) on April 28, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
1
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 44 years old. He is married, and he has two sons. Applicant is a high
school graduate. He is employed by a defense contractor, for whom he has worked
since 2013, and he is seeking a DoD security clearance in connection with his
employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 23 allegations (1.a. through 1.w.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically delinquent debts totaling $31,394, under Adjudicative Guideline F. Applicant
admitted each of the SOR allegations in his RSOR. He wrote that several of these debts
had been charged off and were in collections for many years before his current
employment. He also wrote that he has been speaking to a debt consolidation company
to try to resolve his remaining open debts. Applicant cited the debts listed on the SOR
as 1.b., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.k. as debts that have been charged off. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he disputed the debt listed as 1.h. in the
amount of $143, and he believed that he should not have been charged for that debt.
Applicant also testified that he believed he had paid off the debt, listed as 1.k., in the
amount of $900, in approximately 2006 or 2007. Applicant testified that these two debts
are the only debts listed on the SOR that he has resolved. (Tr at 25-28.) While Applicant
testified that he had resolved these two debts, no independent evidence was offered to
establish that they had been resolved. 
Applicant testified that his financial problems began in 2000 or 2001 when his
older son was in a private school, and his fiancee left him and his son. He contended
that he had been under the misapprehension that his fiancee, with whom he had been
living from 1997 to 2002, had been paying their bills. He ultimately was granted full
custody of his son, but he never received any child support from his ex-fiancee, who
was the mother of his son. His income to pay the bills was not greatly diminished when
she left, since she only worked a limited time when they were together. However, he
became aware shortly before she left in approximately 2002 that he had accumulated all
of these delinquent debts. Applicant testified that when he became aware of the
overdue debts, he contacted some of the creditors and attempted to make some small
payments, but he became overwhelmed and just stopped making any payments. (Tr at
29-35.)  
Applicant testified that he also had a relationship with another woman for seven
years, and she also took advantage of him by using his credit cards and buying others
items that he had not authorized and of which he was not aware. He indicated that the
debts she incurred are not the ones listed on the SOR. (Tr at 36-38.) Applicant has not
had any period of time where he was unemployed for the last 18 years, as he worked as
2
a maintenance worker for a public school for 15 years and then he transitioned into his
present employment for the last 3 years. (Tr at 46-47.) 
Finally, Applicant averred that he and his wife are trying to make sure they better
manage their finances in the future. He did concede that neither he nor his wife has
taken any class or received any counseling to better help them manage their finances,
although they have occasionally listened to a financial expert on television. (Tr at 51-
54.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
3
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt many years ago. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As 
Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred as a result of the failure of his fiancee to pay
their debts, unbeknownst to Applicant, I find this mitigating condition is potentially
applicable in this case. However, since most of these debts were incurred in
approximately 2002, and Applicant has been fully employed since then, and no
independent evidence was introduced to establish that he has taken steps to resolve
any of the 23 debts, I do not find that Applicant has acted responsibly. Therefore, I find
this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
AG ¶ 20(c) and (d) are also not applicable as Applicant has received no
counseling for the problem, and none of Applicant’s delinquent debts have not been
resolved. Therefore, I find Guideline F against Applicant.
4
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions are applicable and the mitigating conditions
do not apply, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the
whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.w.: Against Applicant
 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
5
