1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
REDACTED ) ISCR Case No. 15-02774 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant, who was born, raised and lived her entire life in the United States, 
mitigated the foreign preference security concerns raised by her exercise of foreign 
citizenship. Specifically, Applicant exercised her Nigerian citizenship, which she derived 
through her parents who were originally from Nigeria, by renewing and using a Nigerian 
passport that she first obtained as a teenager at her parents’ direction in order to travel 
to Nigeria for a wedding and to meet her extended family in Nigeria. Applicant 
surrendered her foreign passport to her facility security officer and refuted concerns that 
her preferences lie with Nigeria or any other foreign country. Clearance is granted. 
History of the Case 
On February 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
her exercise of foreign citizenship raised security concerns under the foreign preference 
 
2 
 
 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
On September 29, 2016, a date that was mutually agreed upon by the parties, I 
convened the hearing. Department Counsel offered Exhibit 1, Applicant’s security 
clearance application (SCA), which was admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant chose to testify and post-hearing submitted Exhibit A, a letter from her facility 
security officer (FSO), which states that: (a) Applicant surrendered her Nigerian 
passport to his office and it would be retained by the company in a secure, out-of-state 
corporate facility; (b) the Applicant was advised that if she requested the return of the 
foreign passport, the FSO would immediately report the matter to the Government; and 
(c) after being provided such advice, Applicant “fully accepts and understands that any 
security clearance issued by the Department of Defense may adversely be impacted if 
the foreign passport is returned to her.” Without objection, Exhibit A was admitted into 
evidence. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on October 11, 2016, and the 
record closed on October 31, 2016. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The record was kept open for over a month after the adjournment of the hearing 
to provide Applicant the opportunity to consider whether she wanted to surrender, 
relinquish, or otherwise invalidate her Nigerian passport. Applicant timely submitted 
Exhibit A, which shows that she surrendered her foreign passport to her FSO.  
 
 The record was also kept open until October 31, 2016, to allow Department 
Counsel the opportunity to amend the SOR to address Applicant’s disclosure at hearing 
that her fiancé and his family were all foreign citizens and residents of Nigeria. I 
sustained Applicant’s objection to Department Counsel’s attempt to expand the hearing 
to consider the security concern that these new foreign connections and contacts 
potentially raised under Guideline B. I found that Applicant, who was not represented by 
counsel, was not on notice and clearly not prepared to address this potential new 
matter. At the same time, recognizing the potential security significance of this newly 
revealed information and the Government’s legitimate concerns, I provided Department 
Counsel over 30 days within which to decide whether to amend the SOR and provide 
the proposed amendment to Applicant, which would comply with the Directive’s notice 
requirement, provide Applicant the opportunity to address the concern, and avail herself 
of the procedural safeguards afforded to her by the Directive, notably, the right to 
counsel. (Tr. 14-20, 34-39, 49-53)2 Department Counsel did not amend the SOR. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 12-11375 (App. Bd. Jun. 17, 2016) (judge erred in relying on non-alleged matters, which 
applicant was not provided notice of nor had an opportunity to respond to, as basis for denial). See also, 
ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (Administrative Judge Ra’anan’s concurring 
opinion discussing potential due process concerns regarding a pro se applicant and waiver is instructive). 
 
3 
 
 
Accordingly, this decision only addresses the foreign preference security concern 
alleged in the SOR.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in her twenties, was born and raised in the United States. She 
attended a U.S. college on a full academic scholarship, and graduated early with 
honors. She received a degree in finance. While attending college, Applicant completed 
several different internships and worked part-time at U.S. companies and a state 
government agency. Upon graduating from college, Applicant received multiple job 
offers, including from two large U.S. defense contractors. She accepted the offer from 
her current employer because she wanted to remain close to where her family resides 
in the United States. She has been living with her mother in State A since graduating 
from college. She is saving her money to purchase a home in the United States with her 
fiancé after they marry. During her free time, Applicant is engaged in volunteer activities 
through the Red Cross and the DOD. (Tr. 8, 24, 41-43; Answer) 
 
 Applicant has been with her current employer for over four years. She has been 
steadily promoted and received performance-based awards and salary raises, including 
a recent five percent increase in compensation. Currently, Applicant serves as a 
financial analyst, directly reporting to directors of the company who are one step below 
the chief financial officer. She has been granted access to and properly handled and 
safeguarded highly sensitive corporate information. (Tr. 8, 24, 43-48) 
 
 In 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 
connection with her job. She disclosed that she had dual citizenship with Nigeria 
through her parents who were originally from Nigeria. Applicant’s parents are U.S. 
citizens, having resided in the United States since the early 1980s. Applicant also 
disclosed on the SCA that she had renewed, possessed, and used a Nigerian passport, 
which she originally obtained when she was in the ninth grade, at the direction of her 
parents who wanted to travel to Nigeria for a family wedding and to have her meet their 
extended family members in Nigeria. Applicant also revealed on the SCA that she 
traveled to Nigeria to visit extended family members and friends in Nigeria on a number 
of occasions. After submitting the SCA, Applicant became engaged. Her fiancé and his 
family are resident-citizens of Nigeria. He was recently granted a K-1 fiancé visa and, as 
of the hearing, was traveling to the United States. Applicant planned to marry her fiancé 
within 90 days of his arrival in the United States. Applicant testified that she no longer 
needs the Nigerian passport because her fiancé will no longer be living in Nigeria. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Here, Applicant, a pro se applicant, was not provided notice of a potential security concern under a 
different adjudicative guideline until being cross-examined by highly skilled counsel at hearing. At a 
minimum, fairness requires that Applicant be provided adequate notice of the new concern and have an 
opportunity to adequately prepare to address this new concern. Contrast with, ISCR Case No. 14-03112 
at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (judge properly allowed Department Counsel to amend SOR to allege 
additional foreign familial connections and contacts that were only uncovered at hearing, because the 
SOR in that case put applicant adequately on notice that his foreign connections and contacts were a 
security concern.))  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s Nigerian passport will expire in December 2016. (Tr. 27-28, 32-38; Exhibit 1; 
Answer) 
 
 After submitting the SCA, Applicant underwent a standard security clearance 
background interview. She was (improperly) advised by the agent conducting the 
interview that she could retain her Nigerian passport and still receive a security 
clearance. She subsequently followed up with her employer and was advised if she 
relinquished or surrendered the foreign passport that her chances of being granted a 
clearance would be enhanced. She was told by her employer it was unclear whether if 
she decided to retain the foreign passport whether she would still be eligible for a 
security clearance. At hearing, Applicant was informed that if she decided to keep the 
foreign passport that her request for a security clearance would be denied. She was 
also told that even if she decided to surrender or relinquish her Nigerian passport that in 
and of itself would not necessarily or automatically mitigate the security concerns at 
issue. Nevertheless, after the hearing, Applicant surrendered her foreign passport to her 
FSO. (Tr. 14-20, 28-31, 49-53; Exhibit A) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a 
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at 
a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted 
by the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the security concerns at issue, has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
concerns, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, 
an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 
2(b). Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations 
and the paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has 
 
5 
 
 
held that “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 10865 § 
7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an applicant, 
at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines established for 
determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
 Applicant’s possession and use of a Nigerian passport after becoming an adult 
raises this concern and also establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), 
“exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship,” to include 
“possession of a current foreign passport.” 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign preference security concern. She surrendered the 
foreign passport to her FSO. Furthermore, she originally obtained the passport when 
she was a teenager at her parents’ direction; renewed it before being hired by her 
current employer and submitting an SCA; retained it because she was improperly 
advised (or, did not fully understand the advice provided) regarding the security 
significance of a prospective clearance holder possessing a valid foreign passport; and 
she no longer needs the passport, as her fiancé has immigrated to the United States. 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, I find that the mitigating condition listed 
at AG ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated” applies.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).3 I hereby incorporate my above comments and highlight 
some additional whole-person factors. Applicant has been candid about her foreign 
passport and connections from the start of her security clearance background 
investigation. Furthermore, Applicant has a demonstrated track record of properly 
handling and safeguarding highly sensitive information entrusted to her care by her 
current employer, a large U.S. defense contractor. These favorable whole-person 
factors, coupled with the other matters noted under Guideline C, mitigate the foreign 
preference security concern.4 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
4 This favorable conclusion does not prevent the Government from re-reviewing Applicant’s eligibility in 
light of her changed circumstances, notably, her new foreign connections and contacts in Nigeria. 
