 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
  
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07170 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the sexual behavior, criminal 
conduct, and personal conduct security concerns. He mitigated the Guideline B security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
October 4, 2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative 
decision to grant Applicant a clearance. On October 27, 2015, the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual behavior), B (foreign influence), J 
(criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
November 20, 2015, and requested a decision based on the written record. On January 
15, 2016, the Government requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 1) The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 27, 2016, scheduling 
a hearing for May 16, 2016.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered 10 exhibits (GE 1 through 10). GE 10 is 
the Government’s discovery letter to Applicant that was marked and made part of the 
record, but it will not be considered evidence. Applicant testified, and submitted two 
exhibits (AE) 1 and 2. All exhibits were made part of the record without objections. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 25, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.c, 3.a, 3.b, 
and 4.a through 4.e. He denied the allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.d, 3.c, and 4.d. His 
SOR and hearing admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
college in 2010, at age 21, and received a bachelor of science degree. Shortly 
thereafter, he was hired by a defense contractor. In June 2011, Applicant requested 
eligibility for access to classified information, required for his position, and was granted 
a top secret level clearance. According to Applicant, he has possessed his top secret 
clearance from 2011 to present. Applicant married his wife in 2013, and as of the 
hearing day, they were expecting their first child. There is no evidence of any security 
violations or issues of security concern, except for those alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant met (M), a Brazilian citizen and resident, while both were in college in 
the United States, but studying abroad. They lived in the same building during four 
months while studying abroad and became close friends. Applicant visited M in Brazil in 
2010 after college and in 2015 with his wife. They have continued their close friendship 
to present, and communicate in a frequent basis. M’s father, grandfather, and aunt hold 
or held important positions at the highest levels within the Brazilian government. (Tr. 27-
36) 
 
While in college, Applicant was prescribed Adderall to help him deal with anxiety 
and maintain his focus while studying and taking tests. In October 2009, at age 20, 
Applicant sold two Adderall to one of his fraternity brothers who was a frequent user of 
illegal drugs. (Tr. 102) He claimed that, at the time, he did not realize he was doing 
something wrong, but averred he has never again given prescription medications to 
anyone. He also claimed he has never used marijuana. Applicant did not disclose in his 
2011 SCA, or in his subsequent background interview, that he sold Adderall to his 
fraternity brother in October 2009. He claimed he forgot about it and made an innocent 
mistake. 
 
 
3 
 
 
In December 2009, one of Applicant’s fraternity brothers was driving while 
intoxicated (DWI), failed to use a turn signal, and drove on a sidewalk. He then drove to 
the fraternity house followed by police officers. He knew that if he was arrested he 
would be charged with DWI and asked Applicant to take the blame for him. Applicant 
lied to the police officers to protect his friend. He told the police officers that he was 
driving the car they followed to the fraternity house. Applicant was issued citations for 
not using his turn signal and driving on the sidewalk, for which he paid some fines. 
 
In 2013, Applicant requested an upgrade of his clearance level to work in 
contracts with another Government agency (Agency). He was required to participate on 
a lifestyle polygraph-assisted interview. Prior to the interview, Applicant asked people 
for advice because he was nervous. He asked for strategies to help calm himself down 
and make sure he did not come across as lying. (Tr. 114) During the interview, he was 
asked whether he had ever done something for which he could have been arrested. 
Applicant disclosed for the first time that he had sold the Adderall to a fraternity brother 
in 2009, his false statement to police officers to cover for his fraternity brother’s DUI in 
2009, and that in 2011 he drove under the influence of alcohol. 
 
Additionally, Applicant disclosed that between 2007 and 2011, he downloaded 
child pornography from a file sharing database. According to the Agency’s documents, 
Applicant told the Agency’s polygraph interviewer that a friend showed him child 
pornography videos he had in his computer. After seeing them, Applicant started 
searching an online database for similar videos. He told the Agency interviewer that he 
did not remember the specific search terms he used, but assumed they would have 
been similar to “girls,” as well as stating specific ages, such as 13. (GE 9) 
 
He stated that the videos featured naked females ages 12-17, who were not 
always engaging in sexual acts. According to the summary of the interview, he 
described the younger range, closer to 12 years old, as females who were not 
developed and appearing to be prepubescent. The older range, closer to 17 years old, 
were developed but appeared to be younger and the title of the video stated their age. 
He downloaded child pornography sporadically, masturbated watching the videos, and 
then immediately deleted them. He stated that no one knew about it, and that he had no 
intention of ever doing it in the future. As a result of Applicant’s statements, the Agency 
denied his request for an upgrade of his clearance level in February 2014. (GE 9) 
 
In his answer to the SOR Applicant stated: 
 
. . . . during the polygraph exam, I misspoke and embellished my answer 
involving the downloading of child pornography as I felt the only way to 
pass the exam was to say anything that came to my head whether it was 
the truth or not . . . . I unfortunately convinced myself I had downloaded 
child porn even though I have never knowingly downloaded any . . . . I did 
download pornography and did masturbate to it but I believe all persons 
involved were of age. I have downloaded nothing since college and have 
no intention of ever doing so again. Last year I was investigated by the 
 
4 
 
 
state police per the results of the polygraph exam and my computer was 
searched by the investigator. There was no child pornography found and 
no charges were filed. 
 
At hearing, Applicant testified it was possible he had downloaded child 
pornography – occasionally he would download pictures and movies with girls that 
appear to be too young and he did not like it. He averred he immediately deleted those 
files. Applicant claimed he did not recall discussing any girl age ranges with the 
polygraph interviewer, or having a clear sense of the ages of any of the participants in 
the videos. (Tr. 108) Applicant testified that it was very difficult for him to remember 
anything that he said or happened during the interview because he did not want to 
remember anything that happened during the interview. (Tr. 110) He admitted to 
searching and downloading pornographic material, but denied ever searching out for 
anything that would illicit child pornography, or knowingly downloading child 
pornography. He reiterated that occasionally he downloaded material he was not 
comfortable with because the girls appeared to be underage, but claimed he deleted it. 
(Tr. 111) 
 
Applicant explained at the hearing, that the Agency interviewer made him feel as 
if he had done something bad, that he had downloaded child pornography. Applicant 
testified that he felt compelled to go along with the interviewer’s opinions because if he 
didn’t, he would look poorly at the end of the polygraph exam and he feared his 
clearance would be denied. (Tr. 88) 
 
Following the denial of Applicant’s clearance upgrade, the Agency filed a JPAS 
incident report documenting the denial. Applicant was required to submit an updated 
security clearance application (SCA) in March 2014. Government investigators 
attempted to interview Applicant concerning the reasons for the denial of his clearance 
upgrade in September 11, 18, 24, and 29 of 2014. Applicant refused to speak with the 
Government investigators, and claimed he did not know the reason for his clearance 
denial with regard to sexual behavior. He was made aware that his refusal to answer 
questions would be considered as him refusing to cooperate with the clearance 
investigation, and that his refusal would be grounds to deny his request for a clearance. 
Applicant refused to discuss or to answer any questions until he was issued the SOR. 
 
Applicant testified that he knew the Agency denied his clearance upgrade 
because of his child pornography related behavior. (Tr. 95) He explained he did not 
want to discuss this issue with government investigators because after the polygraph 
assisted interviews, the Agency notified the state police who then opened an 
investigation against Applicant, visited his home, and searched his computer. Applicant 
claimed the incident placed undue hardship on him and his wife, and he did not want his 
wife to go through the process again, even if that meant he was going to lose his 
clearance and his job. Applicant decided to put his family first. (Tr. 112) Applicant did 
not inform his employer about the complete extent of the SOR allegations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant is considered to be an excellent husband. His friends and supervisors 
consider him to be extremely honest, hardworking, and dependable. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior: 
 
6 
 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four disqualifying conditions relating to sexual behavior that 
apply to this case, raise a security concern, and may be disqualifying:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
  Between 2007 and 2011, Applicant searched for, downloaded, and masturbated 
to child pornography. Applicant’s sexual behavior exposed him to criminal charges; 
made him vulnerable to possible coercion, exploitation, and duress; and reflected lack 
of judgment and discretion. AG ¶¶ 13(a), (b), and (c) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 14 lists conditions that could mitigate the sexual behavior security 
concerns.  
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s sexual behavior was frequent, occurred during an extended period, 
and it still cast serious doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Furthermore, it could still serve as a basis for coercion, exploitation or duress. 
It is not clear whether Applicant disclosed the extent of the child pornography 
allegations to his wife and employer.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, and in light of Applicant’s conflicting 
statements, his denials to searching for, downloading, and masturbating to child 
pornography are not credible. Applicant claimed that the Agency interviewer somehow 
forced him to admit things he did not do (search for, download, and masturbate to child 
pornography) and that her investigation report was not accurate. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR, and testified at his hearing, that during the 
polygraph-assisted interview he misspoke and embellished his answers involving the 
downloading of child pornography as he felt the only way to pass the exam was to say 
anything that came to his head whether it was the truth or not. He even claimed that 
during the interview, he convinced himself that he had downloaded child pornography 
even though he had never knowingly downloaded any. 
 
Applicant admitted that he searched for pornography and masturbated to it. He 
also admitted that he occasionally downloaded what he believed was child 
pornography, albeit not intentionally, and claimed he immediately deleted it. In light of all 
the evidence, Applicant’s claims of innocence are not credible. I find it difficult to believe 
that Applicant would made such damaging admissions against his criminal interest just 
to pass a polygraph-assisted interview. Moreover, he admitted that he “misspoke and 
embellished” his statements about downloading child pornography, and then claimed 
the interviewer somehow did something wrong when she reflected his statements in the 
investigation report. I find that Applicant disclosed the details of his criminal sexual 
habits to the interviewer and she reflected them on the investigation report. Ultimately, 
either he lied during the polygraph-assisted interview or he has been lying since. In 
either case, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the sexual behavior security 
concerns. I have serious doubts about Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good 
judgment. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
 
8 
 
 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying AG ¶ 7 in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information 
 
  Applicant met (M), a Brazilian citizen and resident, while both were attending 
college in the United States, but studying abroad. They lived in the same building during 
four months while studying abroad and became close friends. Applicant visited his 
Brazilian friend in 2010 after college and in 2015 with his wife. They have continued 
their close friendship to present and communicate on a frequent basis. M’s father, 
grandfather, and aunt hold or held important positions at the highest levels within the 
Brazilian government.  
 
  The mere possession of close ties of affection or obligation with a person in a 
foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if 
only one person with close ties lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts 
with that relative, this factor alone may be sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.2  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and 
obligation with M and family in Brazil. These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that Brazilian agents or 
individuals operating in Brazil may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or 
classified information about the United States. Applicant’s friends in Brazil create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly or through his family members in 
Brazil. 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising potentially disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
9 
 
 
Government. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 The United States and Brazil traditionally have enjoyed robust political and 
economic relations. They have a long history of deepening people-to-people ties 
through exchanges in education, energy, health, science and technology, and 
innovation. There is no evidence to show that Brazil has engaged in economic or 
industrial espionage against the United States, or other security concerns. (U.S. 
Department of State, Fact Sheet: U.S. Relations With Brazil, July 29, 2015)  
 
 Applicant has a close personal relationship (friendship) with a college roommate 
from Brazil (M). Applicant has frequent contact with M via social media and telephone 
contact. He visited M and his family in Brazil in 2010 and 2015. Applicant’s Brazilian 
friend’s family hold or have held important positions at the highest levels within the 
Brazilian government. Notwithstanding, considering the U.S.-Brazil relations, how the 
 
10 
 
 
friendship developed, and their contacts and relationship after college, I do not find that 
Applicant’s friendship with M creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. I further find that AG ¶ 8(a) and (b) 
apply and mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted that in October 2009, he sold two 
Adderall pills to a fraternity brother. He claimed that before or after this incident he 
never sold any drugs to anyone else. In December 2009, to cover for a fraternity brother 
who was driving while intoxicated, Applicant made false statements to police officers 
taking responsibility for driving on a sidewalk and not using a turn signal. He was issued 
citations and paid a fine.  
 
  The SOR also cross-alleged as a criminal conduct security concern that between 
2007 and 2011, Applicant searched for, downloaded, and masturbated to child 
pornography. (SOR ¶ 1.a) For the same reasons discussed under the sexual behavior 
guideline, incorporated herein, I find that Applicant’s sexual behavior exposed him to 
criminal charges; made him vulnerable to possible coercion, exploitation, and duress; 
reflected a lack of judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness; and showed an inability or 
unwillingness to comply with the law.  
 
 Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
11 
 
 
 For the same reasons stated under the sexual behavior guideline, incorporated 
herein, I find that AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) apply in part, but do not fully mitigate the criminal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Under this guideline, the SOR cross-alleged that Applicant: illegally sold Adderall 
(SOR ¶ 3.a); lied to police officers to cover for a fraternity brother who drove while 
intoxicated (SOR ¶ 3.b); and between 2007 and 2011, Applicant searched for, 
downloaded, and masturbated to child pornography. (SOR ¶ 1.a) These allegations 
have been previously discussed under the sexual behavior and criminal conduct 
guidelines. For the sake of brevity, my findings, discussions, and conclusions under the 
above guidelines are incorporated herein.  
 
  Additionally, the SOR alleged that in 2014, the Agency denied Applicant an 
upgrade of his clearance because of improper criminal and sexual behavior (based on 
the security concerns set forth in the above paragraph); that Applicant refused to 
cooperate with government investigators on September 11, 18, 24, and 29 of 2014, who 
were performing background interviews; and that Applicant falsified his June 2011 SCA 
when he answered “no” to the question of whether he had illegally sold drugs, and 
deliberately failed to disclose that in 2009 he sold Adderall to a fraternity brother. 
 
  Applicant admitted the denial of his clearance upgrade by the Agency in 2014. 
He explained that he refused to cooperate in the security background investigation 
because he wanted to protect his family (wife) from the stress of another sexual 
allegation investigation, even if that meant losing his clearance and his job. Concerning 
his failure to disclose that he sold Adderall in 2009, Applicant claimed that he made an 
honest mistake – that he had just forgotten about it. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, Applicant’s claims of innocent mistake are not credible. 
 
  Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability the following disqualifying condition 
under AG ¶ 15: 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
12 
 
 
  It also triggers the applicability the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigation, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefit status, determine security clearance eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibility; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s age, education, 
experience working for a government contractor while possessing a clearance, the 
 
13 
 
 
circumstances surrounding the offenses, the seriousness of the sexual behavior 
offenses, and his lack of credibility, I find that Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. Applicant’s conflicting testimony, in light of 
the evidence as a whole, is not credible and diminishes the probative value of his 
explanations and otherwise favorable or mitigating evidence.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines D, B, J, and E 
in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years working for a defense contractor. He is 
considered to be an excellent husband and father. His friends and supervisors consider 
Applicant to be extremely honest, hardworking, and dependable. Notwithstanding, he 
failed to mitigate the Guidelines D, J, and E security concerns. He mitigated the 
Guideline B concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 4.a-4.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
14 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
