 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-00185  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence of the resolution of any of the 14 alleged 
delinquent debts, including unpaid state and Federal taxes. Resulting security concerns 
were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On June 14, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On November 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 23, 2015 (Answer), and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 1.) On January 30, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant on February 3, 2016, and received by him 
on February 9, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. He did not submit any additional information or objections to the 
Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on August 22, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old and divorced from his wife since 2010. He has three 
children. He has worked for his current employer since November 2011. He also has a 
cleaning business. (Item 2.) He was unemployed for a year after his divorce. He stated 
he earns $965 a month, from which he pays $250 in child support. He said he is “doing 
the best that [he] can.” (Answer.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from June 2012, December 2014, and 
February 2015, the SOR alleged 14 debts, including unpaid state taxes for 2010 and 
unpaid Federal taxes for 2011. The allegations totaled $36,047 of debt that became 
delinquent between 2006 and 2012. (Items 4, 5, and 6.) Applicant provided no evidence 
that he has addressed any of the allegations, including the taxes. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
 
 
3 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debt. From 2006 to 2012, he accumulated 
14 delinquent accounts, including unpaid taxes, totaling $36,047. This pattern of 
delinquent debt and inability or unwillingness to pay lawful debts raise security concerns 
under the above disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant failed to produce sufficient evidence that he addressed any of the 
delinquent accounts alleged. He offered no evidence from which to establish a track 
record of debt resolution. He provided minimal evidence that the delinquencies were 
caused by conditions beyond his control, viz., his divorce, or that he acted responsibly 
under those circumstances. He presented no evidence of financial counseling. There 
are no clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved in good faith, or 
are under control. He did not present documentation that he formally disputed any of the 
 
 
5 
 
 
SOR-listed debts or that they have been resolved in his favor. Accordingly, the record is 
insufficient to establish mitigation under any of the above conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
expressed in the SOR. The SOR-listed delinquent debts arose between 2006 and 2012, 
and remain unresolved, despite employment by a government contractor since 2011. 
He provided no evidence of rehabilitation, stable financial judgment, or responsible 
conduct. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from his financial situation 
remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
