 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-03892 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 7, 2016, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 16, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 18, 
2016. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
objection. Applicant testified. He did not submit any documentary evidence at the 
hearing. The record was held open until October 31, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit 
documents. He submitted one that is marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. It is admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 
25, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR except ¶ 1.d, which he denied. 
His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. He holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He served 
in the National Guard from 1981 to 1989 and was honorably discharged. He married in 
1987 and divorced in 1989. He has a 26-year-old child from the marriage. He was 
married from 1993 to 2002. His wife passed away. He has an 18-year-old son from the 
marriage. He remarried in 2007 and divorced in 2009. He has no children from the 
marriage. He has been employed by a federal contractor since October 2013. He has 
no periods of unemployment.1  
 
 Applicant purchased a house in 1996 with his second wife. Applicant attributed 
his financial problems to being a single parent and his 2009 divorce. His wife worked 
and helped pay the family expenses. When they divorced he no longer had her salary to 
help. He testified that he was trying to do too much and his bills became overwhelming. 
His son was in private school and he lost control over his finances. He stopped paying 
his mortgage in about 2010. He continued to live in the house for about five to six 
months until it was foreclosed. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is Applicant’s first mortgage that 
was foreclosed. He believed this debt was satisfied when the house was foreclosed. He 
did not provide documentary evidence to confirm there is no deficiency owed on the 
mortgage after the sale. The debts reflected in the SOR are supported by credit reports 
from April 2015 and September 2013. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is for a second mortgage 
that is reflected in his credit reports as charged off and disputed. Applicant 
acknowledged he obtained a loan for a second mortgage. He could not remember any 
specific facts about either of the debts. He did not provide information or documentation 
about the status of these debts. Both debts are unresolved.2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($571) is for a credit card. Applicant used the account a 
couple of years ago, and he stopped making payments. He plans on paying it in the 
future, but he is not in a position to do so now.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 17-29, 32; GE 1. Applicant’s security clearance application reflects different dates for when Applicant 
married and divorced. It only reflects two marriages and does not reflect the marriage where his wife 
passed away. I have used the dates based on Applicant’s testimony. 
 
2 Tr. 26-38; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 Tr. 38-40. 
 
3 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($11,224) is a line of credit Applicant obtained in about 
2009. A judgment was entered in 2011. Approximately a year ago Applicant’s pay was 
garnished, and he testified that he has been paying $200 a month that is withdrawn 
directly from his paycheck. He provided a copy of his earning statement to show the 
garnishment payment.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶1.h ($189) is a collection account for a home-security system. 
Applicant indicated the debt has been owed since the house was foreclosed. It is not 
paid.5  
 
In November 2015, Applicant had a serious medical condition and was unable to 
work until March 2016. This impacted his finances. He intends to find a second job once 
his health improves and will use the money to pay his debts.6   
 
Applicant’s son was in a private elementary school and the tuition was $600 a 
month. He later attended private high school and the tuition increased to $800 a month. 
His son graduated in May 2016 and is now attending college. Applicant is paying his 
college tuition. He recently paid $4,000 and another bill for $2,000 will be due in 
December 2016. He explained that in the past, he obtained the tuition money from 
family and friends. To pay his son’s tuition, he manages his finances by paying other 
bills late and then pays the late fees to catch-up payments on the delinquent bills. He 
does this with his rent, car loan, and other bills. This is how he intends to pay the 
upcoming tuition bill. He testified that his son does not qualify for financial aid based on 
Applicant’s current income. He is hoping his son can get a work-study job.7  
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in April 2013. It was dismissed in July 
2013. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2013. It was dismissed in August 2013. He 
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2013. It was dismissed in April 2014. 
Applicant testified the reason for the dismissals was because he could not afford to pay 
the bankruptcy fees.8  
 
Applicant disclosed that he owes back taxes to the IRS for tax year 2013. He 
testified the reason he has a tax debt is because his tax preparer did them wrong. He 
was advised by the IRS that he owed additional taxes. He has a monthly installment 
agreement and pays $35 a month. The balance owed is unknown. He acknowledged he 
has a large balance he owes on his cell phone and he is attempting to pay it down.9 
                                                          
4 Tr. 40-45; GE 2, 3; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 45. 
 
6 Tr. 22-24, 47, 61. 
 
7 Tr. 29-32, 61-63; GE 2, 3. 
 
8 Tr. 46, 63-64. 
 
9 Tr. 52-53, 57-60. This information is not considered for disqualifying purposes, but may be considered 
when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, in mitigation, and the whole person.  
 
4 
Applicant acknowledged that since 2009 he made poor financial decisions. He 
plans to be more aware of his finances in the future and promises to “make things 
right.”10 He acknowledged he needs to attend financial counseling, but has not. He has 
no savings.11 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Tr. 65. 
 
11 Tr. 37, 55, 60-61, 64. 
 
5 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to satisfy. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant has numerous debts that are not 
resolved. Applicant attributes his financial problems to a period when he and his wife 
divorced and he lost her income in 2009. In November 2015, he had a medical incident 
and was unable to work until March 2016. These conditions were beyond his control. To 
fully apply AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant did not provide 
evidence of actions he took to resolve his delinquent debts from 2009 to 2015 when he 
developed medical problems. He indicated his home was foreclosed, but it is unknown if 
there is a deficiency owed. He has not addressed the second mortgage or other 
delinquent debts owed, except for a judgment that is being garnished from his wages. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to show he acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies.  
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. He delays paying some of his 
monthly expenses, so he can pay his son’s tuition. He did not provide sufficient 
information to conclude there are clear indications his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant’s wages are being 
garnished to pay the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.g. This is not a good-faith effort to repay a 
creditor. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant does not believe he owes the mortgage 
loan on his foreclosed house, but did not provide documentary evidence to support his 
claim. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his 2009 divorce. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence of actions he has taken since then. He then developed a medical 
problem in 2015 that caused him to miss work for several months. In the past, Applicant 
intentionally delayed paying monthly expenses so he could pay his son’s private school 
tuition. He has a college tuition payment due in December 2016 for his son and intends 
to do the same. He hopes to get a second job in the future to help his financial situation. 
At this time, Applicant does not have a credible financial track record. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
