 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03580 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: August Bequai, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
CERVI, GREGG A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
November 17, 2014, requesting the continuation of her security clearance. After 
reviewing the application and information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a 
statement of reasons (SOR), dated November 5, 2015, explaining it was unable to find 
that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information. It detailed security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.1 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 7, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 23, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for June 29, 2016. At the request of Applicant’s counsel, 
the hearing was rescheduled to July 28, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
rescheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through K were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified at the 
hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 5, 2016. The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information. She submitted additional 
exhibits marked together as AE L, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old logistics analyst working for a defense contractor since 
2013. She currently holds a security clearance and is requesting its renewal. She 
graduated from a U.S. service academy in 1981 and received her master’s degree 
1991. She honorably served as an officer on active duty in the military from 1981 to 
2001, retiring in 2001. She is single, but was previously married in 1983, separated in 
2001, and divorced in 2003. She has two children, ages 17 and 18 years old. 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts that total about $127,000. Additionally, 
the SOR alleges she failed to file federal income tax returns for tax years 2009, 2011, 
2012, and 2013; and state income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, and 2013. The 
SOR allegations are supported by the evidence. Applicant’s actions with respect to the 
SOR allegations and the current status are noted below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Federal income tax 
return for 2009. 
Information provided to tax 
preparer before due date. 
Based on discussions with 
preparer, Applicant thought 
the federal return was e-
filed on time with her state 
tax return (which was 
accepted, and expected a 
refund. Her preparer had 
questions on deductions, 
but Applicant assumed they 
were to be resolved at later 
date. IRS shows automatic 
extension granted to 
December 2010. Final 
return filed April 2012.  
Applicant was not aware the 
federal return was not filed 
on time. Final tax return 
filed 2012. $0 owed. 
Resolved 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on 
September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. 
§ 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
3 
 
1.b Federal income tax 
return for 2011. 
Information provided to tax 
preparer before due date. 
IRA rollover in 2011 was 
incorrectly labeled income 
(only portion was withdrawn 
from account). Paid partial 
tax due in April 2012, but 
disputed incorrect 1099. 
Preparer closed office and 
left company before 
completing return, but 
requested extension to 
December 2012 to file. 
Applicant delayed resolving 
issue until investment 
company acknowledged 
1099 error and new tax 
accountant consulted. 
Applicant filed the 2011 
return in 2014 after 
resolving dispute. 
Applicant consulted new tax 
accountant and filed late 
with corrected 1099 
information. Final return 
filed in 2014.  
$0 owed. Resolved 
1.c Federal income tax 
return for 2012. 
New tax preparer consulted 
and return filed on time in 
2013.  
Filed correctly. $0 owed. 
Resolved 
1.d Federal income tax 
return for 2013. 
Return filed on time in 2014. Filed correctly. $0 owed. 
Resolved 
1.e State income tax return 
for 2011. 
Return filed late with federal 
return after dispute resolved 
by new tax accountant. 
Refund issued January 
2014.  
Filed late with federal 
return. $0 owed. Resolved 
1.f State income tax return 
for 2012. 
Filed on time in 2013. Filed correctly. $0 owed. 
Resolved 
1.g. State income tax return 
for 2013. 
Filed on time in 2014. Filed correctly. $0 owed. 
Resolved 
1.h Bank credit account for 
$21,705. 
Negotiated settlement and 
paid in full in March 2016. 
Paid in full. Resolved 
 
4 
 
1.i Bank equity line of credit 
account for $83,833. 
Line of credit taken in 2006. 
Fell behind in 2011. Debt 
charged-off. In 2012, 
Applicant negotiated 
payment plan with collection 
agent and claims made 
some payments toward 
debt, but not continuous. 
She made a good faith 
payment in July 2016 based 
on discussions to reduce 
interest rate. 
Sporadic payments made, 
with last payment in July. In 
negotiation to reduce 
interest rate, awaiting 
proposal from collection 
agent. Recent good faith 
payment made but remains 
unresolved. 
1.j Retail credit card 
account for $367. 
Paid in 2016. Paid in full. Resolved 
1.k Retail credit card 
account for $112. 
Paid in 2016. Paid in full. Resolved 
1.l IRS debt for tax year 
2011 for $21,000. 
Tax debt in error. See 1.b 
above. Paid taxes owed. 
Paid in full. Resolved 
 
Applicant separated from her husband in 2001. He left the state to attend law 
school. Applicant left her leased home and moved her children into an apartment with 
her mother, who became a caregiver for Applicant’s children. In October 2002, she 
purchased a home. She was divorced in July 2003, with full custody of her children. 
Applicant was devastated when her mother suffered from cancer and passed away in 
March 2009. 
 
In August 2011, Applicant’s employer moved to another state, and she was 
unable to follow. She was unemployed for more than two months. She rolled over her 
401k to an individual retirement account (IRA) and took an early withdrawal of $35,000 
of it to pay home repairs and debts. She was taxed on the early withdrawal, but the 
rollover should have been a non-taxable event. She was not aware that she would incur 
tax penalties at the time of withdrawal. The investment company provided an incorrect 
1099 for her 2011 taxes.  
 
She was again employed in October 2011, but left the position in August 2012.2 
She remained unemployed from August 2012 to December 2012. In January 2013, she 
found a position as an executive secretary in a federal agency, but it payed substantially 
less then she was previously paid. She moved to her current employer in March 2013. 
She consulted a financial planner in March 2015 to organize her finances and assist her 
with paying off debts, and she consulted with an attorney to advise her on bankruptcy 
options, which she rejected. She also worked with a new accountant to correct her tax 
filings. She always used a tax preparer to file income tax returns, and believed her 2009 
                                                          
2 She resigned because of the sudden departure of her hiring manager. GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
return was filed on time. She also disputed the amount owed on her 2011 return 
because of the investment company mistake in accounting for her IRA rollover and early 
withdrawal. 
 
Applicant earns a substantial salary and receives a monthly military retirement 
and some child support assistance.3 She has about $500 in net remainder each month 
after paying expenses, and approximately $5,000 in savings. She also earns additional 
income through a part-time yard-sale business. She is able to meet her expenses based 
on her income, without incurring additional debt. She is up-to-date on her tax returns, 
and does not owe the IRS or state tax authorities. She is in the process of negotiating a 
reduction in interest on her line of credit debt (SOR 1.i). She has made some payments 
toward this debt in the past, and resumed a recent good-faith payment of $559 as she 
negotiates a reduced interest rate. She is expected to continue making monthly 
payments until the debt is resolved. The remaining SOR debts have been paid and 
resolved satisfactorily. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
3 It is unclear when the Applicant’s ex-souse’s child support obligation stops, and whether he has faithfully fulfilled 
this obligation.  
 
6 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations, and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent debts that she was mostly unable to pay. 
She also failed to file her 2009 and 2011 tax returns on time. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
7 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  There is sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial delinquencies 
have been or are being resolved. She suffered periods of unemployment and 
underemployment that directly impacted her financial status. She also is a divorced 
single mother who relied on her mother as a cohabitant to provide child care after the 
divorce. She was devastated by the loss of her mother in 2009 after suffering from 
cancer. 
 
 I find that Applicant initiated good-faith efforts to resolve her debts and to repay 
most of the creditors to date. A remaining debt is in the negotiation process and 
Applicant has resumed payments with a good-faith payment during the process. Her tax 
filing delinquencies resulted from confusion in 2009 about work completed by a tax 
preparer, and a dispute over how an IRA rollover and partial early withdrawal would be 
accounted for on her 2011 tax return. Although she has always relied on professional 
assistance with federal and state tax preparation, she failed to adequately keep abreast 
of the status of her return in 2009, and she failed to take immediate, appropriate action 
when the 2011 dispute arose. However, she has made significant efforts to retain 
appropriate professional assistance, file her delinquent tax returns correctly, and to 
ensure that all other returns were filed on-time. All federal and state tax returns have 
been filed and she has no past-due tax liability. 
 
 Her financial issues no longer cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) apply. I am 
confident Applicant will continue to use her financial resources to pay her obligations on 
time, and stay ahead of her debts to avoid further delinquencies. Overall, Applicant’s 
financial problems have been resolved or are under control. I find that the financial 
considerations concerns have been sufficiently mitigated. 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from unusual circumstances. Once she 
became financial stable with her current employer, she diligently approached her  
creditors and satisfied the majority of her debts. She is in the process of resolving the 
last debt.  Additionally, once she became aware that her 2009 federal tax return was not 
filed on time, she resolved the situation. Likewise, although she delayed in resolving the 
dispute over her 2011 taxes, she eventually obtained competent help and resolved the 
matter satisfactorily. All other tax returns were filed when due, and she has no current 
tax liability. I believe her financial troubles are behind her and she will continue to 
ensure her finances are addressed in an appropriate manner. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
 
   
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
GREGG A. CERVI 
Administrative Judge 
