 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03910 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for 
a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him on December 
30, 2015, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications 
and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed 
                                                          
1 Item 3 (SF 86, dated March 7, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The DOD adjudicators 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated January 28, 2016, Applicant elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on March 14, 2016, and he 
was afforded an opportunity, within 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, 
Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his 
case. Applicant received the FORM on March 21, 2016. A response was due by April 20, 
2016. As of this date, Applicant had not submitted any response to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on November 4, 2016. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan), 
appearing in extracts of six U.S. Government publications. He also requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (Pakistan), appearing in extracts of five U.S. Government publications. Facts 
are proper for administrative notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized 
source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on 
specific, selected source information regarding Afghanistan in publications of the U.S. 
Department of State,3 the U.S. Department of Defense,4 the U.S. Army,5 and the 
Congressional Research Service.6 In addition, the Government relied on specific, 
selected source information regarding Pakistan in publications of the White House7 and 
the U.S. Department of State.8  
                                                          
2 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 28, 2016). 
 
3 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices for 2014, Executive Summary, undated; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, 
Afghanistan Travel Warning, dated November 19, 2015.  
 
4 U.S. Department of Defense, Report to Congress: Report on Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan 
(extracts), dated June 2015; U.S. Department of Defense, Press Release, Obama Adjusts Troop Levels for Continuing 
Afghanistan Mission, dated October 15, 2015. 
 
5 U.S. Army, Press Release, Army General Killed in Afghanistan, dated August 6, 2014. 
 
6 Congressional Research Service, CRS Report for Congress: Afghanistan: Post-Taliban Governance, 
Security, and U.S. Policy (extracts), dated October 15, 2015. 
 
7 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the 
Killing of Osama bin Laden, dated May 2, 2011. 
 
8 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices for 2014 (extracts), undated; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Counterterrorism, Country Reports 
on Terrorism 2014, Chapter 2 Overview: Country Reports: South and Central Asia, (extract referring only to 
Afghanistan) undated; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2014, 
 
3 
                                      
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 201, 
Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,9 as set forth below 
under the Afghanistan and Pakistan subsections. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both of the factual allegations 
pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since December 
2009, has served as a media analyst.10 He previously served as a senior assistant 
program officer and in various retail sales positions. Applicant received a bachelor of arts 
degree in government and international relations in 2006 and a master of arts degree in 
public policy in 2011.11 He has never served in the U.S. military.12 He has never held a 
security clearance, although another U.S. Government agency conducted a security 
clearance investigation of him from 2010 to at least April 2012, without a final 
determination ever being made.13  
 
  
                                                          
Chapter 5: Terrorist Safe Havens (Update to 7120 Report) (extracts), undated; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of 
Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Pakistan, (extract) dated August 28, 2015.  
 
9 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts 
that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative 
information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing internet sources 
for numerous documents). In this instance, although Department Counsel has selected only certain pages of facts 
appearing in the identified publications, I have not limited myself to only those facts, but have considered the 
publications in their entirety. 
 
10 Item 3, supra note 1, at 13-14; Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 16, 2012), at 1-2. 
 
11 Item 3, supra note 1, at 11-12. 
 
12 Item 3, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
13 Item 3, supra note 1, at 41; Item 4, supra note 10, at 6. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Foreign Influence14 
 
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan.15 He entered the United States in 
1997, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen through his father.16 Both of his parents (his 
father is an international organization director, and his mother, a housewife) were born in 
Afghanistan.17 Although Applicant’s father is a former employee of a previous Afghan 
government, neither parent was ever associated with the Afghan military or intelligence 
service.18 His father is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and he retained dual citizenship with 
Afghanistan.19 His mother is a legal permanent United States resident in possession of a 
“Green Card.”20 Although his parents have resided in the United States, Applicant’s father 
accepted a senior position with an independent, nonpartisan, federally funded 
organization created by Congress, and he has been working out of an office in 
Afghanistan.21 Applicant has five siblings, all of whom were born in Pakistan. They are all 
naturalized citizens of the United States, residing in the United States.22 None of 
Applicant’s siblings was ever associated with the Afghan military or intelligence service.23 
 
Applicant married his Afghan-born wife in 2007. She is a legal permanent United 
States resident in possession of a “Green Card.”24 They have two children, one born in 
Afghanistan in 2009, and the other born in the United States in 2011. They are both U.S. 
citizens. Applicant, his wife, and children, reside in the United States.25 Applicant’s 
widowed mother-in-law, an Afghan citizen, was born in Afghanistan, and she now resides 
in Pakistan. She was never associated with the Afghan military or intelligence service.26  
 
 
                                                          
14 General source information pertaining to the foreign influence issues discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 3, supra note 1; Item 4, supra note 10.  
 
15 Item 3, supra note 1, at 5-6. 
 
16 Item 3, supra note 1, at 6-7. 
 
17 Item 3, supra note 1, at 22-25. 
 
18 Item 3, supra note 1, at 22-25. 
 
19 Item 3, supra note 1, at 24. 
 
20 Item 3, supra note 1, at 23. 
 
21 Item 4, supra note 10, at 3; Item 8 (Publication – name and date redacted for privacy reasons). Two U.S. 
Senators, a U.S. Army flag officer, and a director of the independent, nonpartisan, federally funded organization created 
by Congress, have high praise for Applicant’s father’s activities and actions on behalf of the U.S. Government efforts 
in Afghanistan. See character references and letters of appreciation, various dates, attached to Item 2, supra note 2. 
 
22 Item 3, supra note 1, at 26-32. 
 
23 Item 3, supra note 1, at 26-32. 
 
24 Item 3, supra note 1, at 21; Item 4, supra note 10, at 3. 
 
25 Item 3, supra note 1, at 9, 26, 34; Item 4, supra note 10, at 3. 
 
26 Item 3, supra note 1, at 33-34. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
The frequency of contacts between Applicant and his father and Applicant and his 
mother-in-law differs. In 2012, he reported that he generally communicated with his father 
by telephone, e-mail, and in person on a weekly basis. He generally had contact by phone 
with his mother-in-law once every three months or longer.27 None of Applicant’s family 
members are aware that he is currently applying for a security clearance.28 Applicant has 
no financial interests in Afghanistan, and does not own any investments or property there. 
He does not financially support his mother-in-law in Pakistan. 
 
Afghanistan29  
 
Formerly under the control of the United Kingdom, Afghanistan received 
independence in August 1919. It has common borders with Pakistan on the east and the 
south, Iran on the west, and Russia on the north. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political 
history, including an invasion by the Soviet Union in 1979, occupation by the Soviet Union 
until 1989, and civil war between the occupiers and home-grown freedom fighters, known 
as mujaheddin. Anarchy ensued, and fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, 
and religious warlords and their respective militias even after the Soviet Union withdrew 
from the country. By the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power and controlled significant 
portions of the country, imposing repressive policies and Sharia law, guiding all aspects 
of Muslim life. Afghanistan became a sanctuary for terrorist groups. 
 
After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the United States demanded that 
Afghanistan expel Osama Bin-Laden and his followers. Those demands were rejected by 
the Taliban. In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in 
the country, forcing the Taliban out of power. Following a few years of governance by an 
interim government, a democratic presidential election took place in October 2004, and a 
new democratic government took power. Despite the election, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continued to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. Terrorists continue to target United 
States and Afghan interests through suicide bombings, assassinations, and hostage 
taking.  
 
A major concern, particularly during 2012, was “insider attacks” (attacks on the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)-led security mission in Afghanistan, and the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), by Afghan security personnel (also known 
as “green on blue” attacks). These attacks, some of which apparently were carried out by 
Taliban infiltrators into the Afghan forces, declined by late 2012 but continued 
occasionally in 2013. One such attack resulted in the death of a U.S. Army Major General 
in 2014. In 2013, insurgents conducted a significant number of large vehicle-borne 
                                                          
 
27 Item 4, supra note 10, at 3-4. 
 
28 Item 4, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
29 While not included in the Government’s Motion for Administrative Notice pertaining to Afghanistan, the 
following two documents offering news or commentary regarding Afghanistan were submitted by Department Counsel 
as part of the FORM: Item 7 (News Clipping, Afghan Defense Minister Nominee Rejection Signals Problems, dated 
July 7, 2015); Item 8, supra note 21. 
 
6 
                                      
 
improvised explosive device attacks, targeting Coalition Forces bases, military convoys, 
and Afghan government buildings, mostly in southern and eastern Afghanistan. 
Insurgents across Afghanistan used a variety of tactics to target Afghan security 
personnel and Coalition Forces in well-coordinated, complex attacks in major cities and 
rural areas, seeking to expand their territorial influence and further disrupt civil 
governance.  
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record remains poor, for there are continuing 
extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; widespread official corruption and impunity; 
ineffective government investigations of abuses by local security forces; arbitrary arrest 
and detention; judicial corruption; violations of privacy rights; violence and societal 
discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; trafficking in persons; and 
restrictions on freedoms of religion, the press, assembly, and movement. 
 
Taliban insurgents retain the capability and intent to conduct attacks and 
kidnappings of Americans, other Western nationals, and members of the local populace. 
The United States has made a long-term commitment to help Afghanistan rebuild itself 
after decades of war, and along with others in the international community, provides 
substantial assistance, focusing on reintegration, economic development, improving 
relations with Afghanistan’s regional partners, and steadily increasing the security 
responsibilities of the Afghan security forces. The under-governed border between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan remains an extremist safe haven providing sanctuary for many 
of the insurgent groups, which remains a security challenge for both Afghanistan and 
Pakistan, and poses a threat to regional security. There is increased terrorist support 
coming into Afghanistan from Pakistan and Iran. Not only has the security situation 
remained volatile and unpredictable throughout Afghanistan, but there are also tensions 
with Afghanistan over limiting U.S. military operations. 
 
Afghanistan is a war zone. In early 2015, an Afghan Unity Government was formed 
as part of a U.S. – brokered deal following disputed elections. Rather than unifying, the 
participants remain divided and embroiled in political turmoil. In October 2015, 5,500 
additional U.S. forces were deployed to Afghanistan. A U.S. State Department Travel 
Warning for Afghanistan remains in effect, and U.S. citizens are warned against travel to 
Afghanistan. The security situation in Afghanistan is extremely unstable and the security 
threat to all U.S. citizens in Afghanistan remains critical. 
  
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia. It is a low-income 
country, with a population that is 97 percent Muslim. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan 
reassessed its relations with the Taliban and pledged support to the United States and 
the international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom, which aimed at removing the 
Taliban from power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the 
federally administered tribal areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, 
which borders Iran and Afghanistan. Various terrorist organizations, including extremists 
from the Haqqani Network, Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistani (TTP), Lashkar I Jhangvi, Lashkar 
e- Tayyiba, and al-Qaida, operate openly in Pakistan. They are referred to as safe havens 
 
7 
                                      
 
which are essentially ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed areas of Pakistan. 
Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremist groups, al-Qaida uses this 
sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare regional and transnational 
attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and supplies. Taliban financing 
has been traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
Although they did act against TTP, Pakistani authorities did not take significant action 
against the other groups. Things changed in 2013 when one party won a majority of seats 
in the parliamentary elections. Structural reforms on counterterrorism were enacted, 
empowering the national government to address terrorism with enhanced law 
enforcement and prosecutorial powers. 
  
Various extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide attacks 
throughout Pakistan. The attacks have targeted high profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. In January 2011, the Governor of Punjab was assassinated in a 
terrorist attack, and in March 2011, the Pakistani Federal Minister for Minority Affairs was 
assassinated in another terrorist attack. Over 1,500 civilians and security forces 
personnel were killed in 2013 due to such attacks. Similar incidents occurred in 2014. The 
U.S. Department of State continues to warn U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel 
to Pakistan, as the presence of several foreign and indigenous terrorist groups poses a 
potential threat to U.S. citizens throughout Pakistan. 
 
Pakistan consistently ranks among the most corrupt countries in the world by 
numerous international organizations. The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of 
the risks of traveling to Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Several American citizens 
present in Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The 
human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, human 
trafficking, “honor” crimes, sectarian violence, societal discrimination against national, 
ethnic, racial minorities, sexual identity, and caste status, as well as enforced 
disappearances, occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is 
widespread. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to the elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. Since 2009, the United States has allocated more than $8.5 billion for Pakistani 
civilian and security assistance. The United States continues to build a long-term 
partnership with Pakistan, based on a belief that a stable, secure, prosperous, and 
democratic Pakistan is in the long-term U.S. national security interest. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel raided a large compound located 
in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan and shot and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader 
of al-Qaida.  
 
While most of the official U.S. commentary regarding Pakistan focuses on human 
rights violations and terrorist activities, there is little, if any, evidence that Pakistan is an 
active participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or 
violator of export-control regulations. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”30 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”31   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”32 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
                                                          
30 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
31 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
32 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.33  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”34 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”35 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
                                                          
33 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
34 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
35 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
The SOR focused solely on Applicant’s father, because of his dual citizenship, 
previous relationship with the Afghan government, and his current residency; and on 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, because of her Afghan citizenship and Pakistan residence. The 
Government’s argument in the FORM is as follows: 
 
The fact that Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan and his mother-in-law is an Afghan citizen residing in Pakistan, 
combined with the serious risks associated with those two countries, . . . 
demonstrates a heightened risk of concern or exploitation that precludes a 
finding that Applicant has the freedom from foreign influence needed to be 
cleared for access to classified information. Heightened risk is established 
through the detailed information in the Administrative Notice summaries and 
attached supporting documents. Facts of particular note in those 
documents are: 1) the presence of Islamist radical groups, 2) the increased 
levels of terrorism, violence, and insurgency, and 3) significant human rights 
problems. . . All of these facts concerning country conditions in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan demonstrating a heightened risk of exploitation, coercion or 
duress are present due to Applicant’s (and his wife’s) close ties to family 
members who reside in those countries. Moreover, Applicant’s father 
appears to hold a position that may be in some way affiliated with the U.S. 
or Afghan Government, thus making him an even more likely target of those 
elements in Afghanistan looking to harm U.S. and the current Afghan 
governments’ interests. . . . 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.36 Applicant has different relationships with his 
father and mother-in-law. His father, a U.S. citizen, is an employee of an independent, 
nonpartisan, federally funded organization created by Congress, and he has been 
working out of an office in Afghanistan. His mother-in-law, an Afghan citizen, is a widow 
who now resides in Pakistan, nowhere near the FATA or troubled border with 
Afghanistan. They are the sole members of Applicant’s “family” for whom there are 
security concerns. There are no security concerns expressed by the DOD CAF pertaining 
to Applicant’s mother, five siblings, wife, or children.  
The guideline notes two particular conditions that could raise security concerns. 
Under AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that 
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections 
                                                          
36 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. Feb. 
8, 2001). 
 
11 
                                      
 
to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of 
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns.   
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. However, the security significance of those 
identified conditions requires further examination of Applicant’s respective relationships 
with his father who “resides” in Afghanistan, and his mother-in-law residing in Pakistan to 
determine the degree of “heightened risk.”   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.” Also, AG ¶ 8(d) may apply where “the foreign 
contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or are approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s relatives 
or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant factors, including 
the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances in light of any realistic potential 
for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the foreign power in 
question, including the government and entities controlled by the government within the 
relevant foreign country. Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is limited to countries that are 
hostile to the United States.37 In fact, the Appeal Board has cautioned against “reliance 
                                                          
37 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
 
12 
                                      
 
on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations and ‘hostile’ nations when 
adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”38 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the United 
States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the existence 
of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely that a foreign 
government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in that 
foreign country. 
 
As noted above, since October 2001, when U.S. forces and coalition partners led 
military operations in Afghanistan, there has been first an interim government, and then 
a democratic government in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to assert 
power and intimidation within the country. It is less likely that the Afghan government 
would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive information. The real concern in this 
instance is not the Afghan government, but rather al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists. 
 
Applicant’s father, a naturalized U.S. citizen, temporarily resides in Afghanistan 
while he performs his duties with his organization, under the auspices of the U.S. 
Government. Contrary to the assertion of Department Counsel that Applicant’s father 
“appears to hold a position that may be in some way affiliated with the . . . Afghan 
Government,” the evidence reveals no such affiliation. Department Counsel also argued 
that the presence of Islamist radical groups; the increased levels of terrorism, violence, 
and insurgency; and human rights problems in Afghanistan demonstrate that a 
heightened risk of exploitation, coercion or duress are present due to Applicant’s close 
ties to his father. Based on their relationship, and the location of Applicant’s father, there 
is obviously a potential, if not substantial, risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from 
holding a security clearance. That risk is not generated by the Afghan government, but 
rather by Islamic terrorists striking out against the central Afghan authorities and all 
foreigners. Applicant’s father is not unlike members of the U.S. military stationed in 
Afghanistan, for they, too, are potential targets in this war on civilized humanity. The 
“presence of Islamist radical groups and increased levels of terrorism, violence, and 
insurgency” in Afghanistan have also been described for events occurring on September 
11, 2001, and more recently in Fort Hood, Boston, Paris, Nice, Orlando, San Bernardino, 
and New York City. There are U.S. military forces stationed in Afghanistan, and 
Applicant’s father’s continued presence there would be of significant assistance to 
assisting those U.S. forces in fulfilling their mission. 
   
As far as Applicant’s widowed mother-in-law is concerned, there is no evidence 
that she is or has ever been a political activist, challenging the policies of the Afghan or 
Pakistani governments; that terrorists have approached or threatened her for any reason; 
that the Afghan government, Pakistani government, al-Qaida, or the Taliban have 
                                                          
38 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
13 
                                      
 
approached her; or that she currently engages in activities that would bring attention to 
herself. As such, there is a reduced possibility that she would be a target for coercion or 
exploitation by the Afghan government, the Pakistani government, al-Qaida, or the 
Taliban, which may seek to quiet those who speak out against them. Under these 
circumstances, the potential heightened risk created by her residence in Pakistan is 
greatly diminished. 
 
Applicant has substantial connections to the United States, having lived in the 
United States for nearly two decades. His wife, two children, five siblings, and extended 
family members are either U.S. citizens or permanent legal residents in the United States. 
His father is a U.S. citizen performing services in Afghanistan. Applicant’s continuing 
relationship with his father in Afghanistan is close and his contacts with him are relatively 
frequent. However, under the developed evidence, it is unlikely Applicant will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. His relationship with his mother-
in-law in Pakistan, while not as close, is not of such significance. Applicant has met his 
burden of showing there is little likelihood that relationships with his father and mother-in-
law could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Furthermore, I am persuaded 
that Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is steadfast and undivided, and that he has 
“such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 
8(c), and 8(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.39       
                                                          
39 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because his father 
is working in Afghanistan and his mother-in-law is an Afghan citizen residing in Pakistan, 
and they are at risk from al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists.  (See AG & 2(a)(8).)  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. Both 
Applicant and his father have significant experience regarding Afghanistan – experience 
that is extremely helpful or potentially supportive of the U.S. goals in Afghanistan. 
Applicant has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. These 
circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any 
attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him.40 
Moreover, while the “heightened risk” of terrorist activities occurring in Afghanistan and, 
to a lesser extent, in Pakistan are of significance, it should also be remembered that 
terrorists and would-be terrorists are also active in the United States, creating a 
“heightened risk” here as well. With the vast majority of his family members residing in the 
United States, there is a reduced “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Under the evidence presented, I have no questions 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
40 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
