 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04528 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 12, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 30, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
March 10, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence identified as Items 2 through 5, 
and it is admitted into evidence. Applicant submitted documents that were marked as 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. Based on Applicant’s response; I left the record open 
until October 20, 2016, to permit Applicant to submit additional documents, which he 
did. The documents were marked as AEs C through J, and admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on September 13, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 1.e, which he 
denied. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He is college educated. He married in 1987 and has 
four children, ages 25, 23, 17, and 16. He served in the Army Reserve from 1982 to 
1994 and deployed during Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm.  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he attributed his financial problems to periods 
of unemployment and underemployment. In 2008, he left his employment because he 
was aware that the contract he was involved in would be ending, and he would be laid 
off. In anticipation of being laid off, Applicant took a loan from his 401k retirement 
account. He did not provide information as to the total amount of the loan. He stated: 
“The bulk of the State of [] debt was part of a 401k loan I took out prior to being laid off 
from [employer] in 2008 that was converted to reportable income and taxed.”1  
 
Applicant found another job and was employed until March 2010 when the 
contract ended. He took another position, but his annual salary was reduced from 
$120,000 to $100,000, and his health insurance costs increased. The company he 
worked for lost the contract, and he was laid off in August 2011. He was quickly hired by 
another employer with the promise his salary would increase in the coming months, but 
for the short-term his salary would be $84,000, and he had to pay his health insurance 
costs. The decrease in salary caused him financial difficulties.  
 
 Applicant began falling behind on his financial obligations, including his 
mortgage, which went into foreclosure. In April 2012, he began working again at a 
salary level of $120,000. He began to remediate his debt and get his house out of 
foreclosure. Applicant was laid off again in March 2014 for seven months. He had a job 
then for five months, earning $120,000 annually. He stated he again caught up on his 
delinquent mortgage. He was laid off in March 2015 for five months and got another job 
where he is currently working for an annual salary of $120,000.  
 
The SOR alleged Applicant’s tax debts in ¶ 1.a-state tax lien entered 2014 for 
$1,385; ¶ 1.l-state tax lien entered 2012 for $4,033; ¶ 1.m-judgment from state filed in 
                                                          
1 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
 
2011-$2,898; 1.o is a judgment from the state filed in 2010 for $9,555; and ¶ 1.p-unpaid 
state taxes for tax year 2013 for $2,068. Credit reports from November 2010 and 
September 2014 substantiate all of these tax debts, except the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.o. 
Although Applicant admitted to owing this debt, there is insufficient evidence to support 
it, and I find for him on this allegation. The other debts alleged in the SOR are supported 
by the credit reports noted above.2 
 
 Applicant indicated in his January 2016 answer that he has a payment plan with 
the state regarding these debts. He stated “our payment on this debt is about $290 per 
month.”3 He did not provide documents to show any payments. In his March 2016 
response to the FORM, he provided a copy of an “installment bill” from the state dated 
October 2015 indicating that the current balance owed was $13,807, and he was to pay 
$269 a month. In his October 2016 response, he indicated he had made a lump-sum 
payment of $2,000 by check to the state, and he arranged a payment plan of $500 per 
month. He provided a copy of a check from June 2016 made out to cash and a 
withdrawal from his account in June 2016 for $503. He did not provide supporting 
documents to show these amounts were sent to the state or if he had complied with his 
previous monthly payment plan. SOR ¶ 1.p alleges he failed to pay his 2013 state 
taxes. Applicant did not provide an explanation.4 
 
 Applicant also incurred federal tax consequences from his 401k withdrawal. SOR 
¶ 1.n alleges a judgment owed to the federal government for $28,766 entered in 2010. 
He indicated it is a tax lien, and he is paying it. He provided documents that show he 
made payments of $791 in February, March, August, September, and October 2016. He 
indicated that his federal income tax refunds were applied to the tax lien. He provided a 
letter from October 2016 that his request to the IRS that the federal tax lien be 
withdrawn was approved. He indicated that he still owes the IRS approximately 
$15,500.5  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b is a judgment ($158) that was filed in 2013. This was for a ticket 
Applicant received in 2012. He did not complete the full payment of the debt until April 
2016.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is a judgment ($2,859) filed in 2012 for a delinquent timeshare 
account. Applicant indicated in his October 2016 response that he was resolving the 
debt. He provided a document dated September 23, 2016, that showed an agreement 
                                                          
2 Items 4, 5.  
 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Item 1, AE B, C. 
 
5 AE B, C, I.  
 
6 AE C. 
 
4 
 
 
to modify his loan and resume a payment plan of $277 per month on a mortgage 
balance of $12,822. The plan is to begin in November 2016.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($3,332) is for Applicant’s mortgage. In his SOR answer, 
he indicated his mortgage was current as of December 2015. In October 2016 he 
stated: 
 
At the time in December when we were current, we were barely so and 
that was a fragile situation. Over the next few months, we fell behind again 
because we were not able to make full payments. We were still making 
payments and the information below shows that we just were not able to 
catch up the two months. However, in working with [mortgage company] 
we entered into a plan to bring the account current again and drop our 
interest rate 0.5% and monthly payment by $50 per month.8 
  
Applicant did not provide documents from the mortgage company to show he no longer 
has a delinquent balance owed or the terms and compliance with a modification of his 
mortgage.9 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.e is a credit card debt. Applicant represented that this debt was a 
judgment ($21,275) that was entered in July 2011 and was satisfied in January 2015. 
He provided supporting documents.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f is a delinquent line of credit. Applicant believed the balance owed is 
$24,000. In his SOR answer, he anticipated reengaging the creditor in the spring of 
2016 because his mortgage was current. He did not provide additional updated 
information of actions to resolve this debt.11 
 
Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he was unable to pay the medical 
debts owed in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($637), 1.h ($366), 1.i ($92), 1.j ($55), 1.k ($50), and 1.r 
($387). He intended to pay these debts in 2016. In October 2016, Applicant indicated 
the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.r are paid in full and they are “no longer 
an open item on my credit report.” He failed to provide documents showing his 
payments or a complete credit report that shows they are reflected as paid.12  
                                                          
7 AE C, H, J. 
 
8 AE C. 
 
9 Applicant provided “screen shots” of payments he made and then his notations about the information, 
but did not provide documents from the creditor regarding the current status of the debt. 
 
10 AE C. 
 
11 Item 1; AE C. 
 
12 Item 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant indicated that the medical judgment in SOR ¶ 1.q ($1,238) was 
resolved through a garnishment in 2011. In his updated response in October 2016, the 
court document he provided is for a different amount than the amount reported on his 
credit report. The credit report shows the judgment was entered in March 2010. The 
documents Applicant provided from the court reflect the judgment was entered in May 
2010. It is unclear if this is the same debt. However, I will accept Applicant’s statement 
that the debt is resolved as credible. 
  
 Applicant stated he has been working hard to reduce his debt, establish payment 
plans, and work on resolving collection accounts, and he has reduced his spending.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
13 Item 1; AE A, B, C. 
 
6 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.14 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, tax liens, and judgments that were 
unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved or paid all of his delinquent debts, judgments and tax 
liens. His financial problems are recent. Although he has addressed some of his 
delinquent accounts, there is insufficient evidence to conclude his financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. As recently as October 2016, he was implementing a new payment 
plan because he was unable to pay his mortgage. This occurred after he had responded 
that he was current in December 2015. Applicant did not provide evidence of his current 
financial situation. His financial issues cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. These were conditions beyond his control. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
did not provide sufficient amplifying information about his 401k loan, only to say it was 
later taxed as income. He owed both state and federal income taxes. State tax liens and 
judgments were filed against him and a federal tax lien was filed in 2010. He did not 
explain why he failed to pay his 2013 state taxes. He provided a document from 
October 2015 that shows an installment plan with the state, but it did not show he has 
been making payments. He provided a copy of a check made out to cash and a 
withdrawal from his account, but he did not show that these amounts were paid to the 
state. Applicant did show that he made payments on his federal tax debt, and the IRS 
 
8 
 
 
has agreed to withdraw the tax lien. It is unknown if Applicant’s tax debt is solely from 
his 401k transaction. He indicated that “the bulk” of it was, but failed to explain. 
Applicant also indicated he paid the medical debts owed, but did not provide proof of his 
payments or a complete credit report. A judgment was resolved through garnishment 
and another judgment was paid years after it was entered. I cannot find Applicant acted 
responsibly with regard to his finances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
There is no evidence Applicant participated in financial counseling. He has 
addressed some delinquent debts, but he failed to provide sufficient evidence of his 
finances to conclude they are under control. He was unable to make his full mortgage 
payments, but then stated he made a lump-sum payment of $2,000 on his state tax 
debt, and during this same period he paid all of his delinquent medical bills and 
negotiated a new payment agreement to make monthly payments on his timeshare. AG 
¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
Resolving a debt through garnishment, after a judgment or tax lien has been 
entered, or after the account has gone to collection, does not constitute a good-faith 
effort to pay overdue creditors. There is evidence that some of his debts are now 
resolved. They are the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.q. It also appears that Applicant 
is paying his federal tax debt, and the IRS has agreed to withdraw the lien. Applicant 
indicated he still owes about $15,500 to the IRS. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these debts.  
 
Applicant indicated he paid some debts, but he failed to provide documentary 
evidence to show the debts are resolved or to support his disputes. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
9 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He had periods of unemployment and 
underemployment that impacted his finances. He failed to pay his state and federal 
taxes with regard to a 401k withdrawal. He failed to pay his 2013 state taxes. He also 
failed to provide sufficient information about the facts surrounding his tax debts. Some 
of Applicant’s debts were resolved through garnishment after judgments were entered. 
He indicated others are paid, but he did not provide documentary proof. He recently 
indicated he had difficulty making his mortgage payments, but had negotiated a 
modification. However, he failed to provide the supporting documents to show his 
mortgage is current. He also has a large delinquent debt incurred through a line-of-
credit that he has not addressed. Insufficient evidence was provided to make a 
determination as to Applicant’s current financial stability. Applicant does not have a 
reliable financial track record. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.o:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.p:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.q:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.r:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
