 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04833 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 9, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
11, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 23, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 3, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2014. He attended college and trade schools, but 
he has not earned a degree. He is married for the second time after his first marriage 
ended in divorce. He has a 12-year-old child.1 
 
Applicant had recurring periods of unemployment and underemployment before 
he obtained his current job. He supported his wife while she was in nursing school. He 
was unable to pay all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent.2 
 
The SOR originally alleged 13 delinquent debts, but Department Counsel 
withdrew SOR ¶ 1.f because it is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.e. I further find that the child 
support debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($5,639) and 1.g ($7,508) are duplicates. The 11 
non-duplicate debts total about $15,800, including $1,904 owed to the IRS for tax years 
2010 and 2011. Applicant admitted owing all the debts. 
 
Applicant reported a number of delinquent debts on his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in November 2014. He stated 
that he would start to repay his debts when his wife completed school in January 2015. 
He discussed his finances when he was interviewed for his background investigation in 
February 2015. He stated that he would pay his debts when his wife started working.3 
 
Applicant’s wife has been working as a nurse for more than 18 months. He is 
paying his child support, but it is unclear how much he is paying towards the 
arrearages. He paid other debts, but he has not paid any of the debts alleged in the 
SOR. He estimated his federal tax liability to be about $15,000, which includes 
additional unpaid taxes from tax years 2012 through 2015. He also owes about $3,000 
in state taxes.4 He retained a law firm for financial counseling and to assist him in 
repairing his credit. He went on short-term disability in about May 2016, and he did not 
anticipate returning to work until about November 2016. He has a round-trip commute to 
work of about three to four hours, which is expensive and places wear and tear on his 
vehicle. He stated that he intends to repay his debts after he returns to work.5  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 29; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-19, 25; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 GE 1, 2. 
 
4 The SOR only alleged delinquent federal taxes from tax years 2010 and 2011. It did not allege state 
taxes. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be 
considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
5 Tr. at 17-24, 27-28, 30-33; GE 3, 4. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g are duplicates. When the same conduct is alleged twice in 
the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicate allegations should be resolved 
in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) (same 
debt alleged twice). SOR ¶ 1.g is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment and underemployment were beyond his control. He 
supported his wife through nursing school. He has been on short-term disability since 
about May 2016. However, he did little to address his debts during the period when both 
he and his wife were working. His finances are worse than when he applied for a 
security clearance in 2014 because he did not pay his 2014 and 2015 taxes. He stated 
that he intends to pay his debts when he returns to work. The Appeal Board has held 
that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of 
debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 
2009)).  
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) 
(financial counseling) is applicable; the second part (clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I 
find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h-1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
