 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00239 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct or the personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J and E. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 24, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 4, 2016. The FORM 
 
2 
 
 
was mailed to Applicant who received it on March 11, 2016. The documents in the 
FORM included the pleadings (Items 1-2) and evidence (Items 3-5). Applicant was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. He did not submit any additional evidence or object to the Government’s 
evidence. Items 3-5 are admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on 
November 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.r. He denied SOR 
¶ 2.b (he failed to respond to SOR ¶ 2.a, which was a cross allegation of SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.r). The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is married and has one adult child. He has worked 
for his current employer, a defense contractor, since February 2014. Before 2014, he 
worked in the private sector. He has never held a security clearance before.1  
   
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR concerning Guidelines J 
includes:  
 (1) pleading guilty to driving on a suspended license in July 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a);  
(2) being arrested for driving on a suspended license, and other related charges, 
in June 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b);  
(3) being charged with driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol/controlled 
substance and other related charges in June 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c); 
(4) being charged with DUI and other related charges in November 2003 (SOR ¶ 
1.d); 
(5) being charged with DUI of alcohol/controlled substance and other related 
charges in September 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.e); 
(6) being charged with under the influence of a controlled substance in July 2002 
(SOR ¶ 1.f); 
(7) being charged with possession of a controlled substance in June 2002 (SOR 
¶ 1.g); 
(8) being charged with DUI of alcohol/controlled substance in January 2002 
(SOR ¶ 1.h); 
(9) being charged with under the influence of a controlled substance in 
November 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.i); 
(10) being charged with rape of spouse by force, fear, or threat in January 1994 
(SOR ¶ 1.j); 
 (11) being charged with contempt of court in October 1991 (SOR ¶ 1.k); 
(12) being charged with assault with the intent to rape, spousal abuse, and 
possession of amphetamines in August 1988 (SOR ¶ 1.l);  
(13) being charged with possession of a controlled substance in March 1988 
(SOR ¶ 1.m); 
                                                          
1 Item 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
(14) being charged with sale and transporting marijuana/hashish in June 1986 
(SOR ¶ 1.n); 
(15) being charged with parole violation and transporting marijuana in April 1983 
(SOR ¶ 1.o); 
(16) being charged and convicted of felony credit card fraud and sentenced to 
three years’ incarceration in January 1981 (SOR ¶ 1.p); 
(17) being charged with grand theft of personal property in October 1979 (SOR ¶ 
1.q); 
(18) being charged with burglary in March 1977 (SOR ¶ 1.r). 
 
 The personal conduct allegations included cross alleging all the Guideline J 
allegations, and deliberately failing to provide correct information while completing his 
security clearance application in March 2014 concerning past felony offenses and 
offenses involving drugs and alcohol by failing to disclose the offenses listed in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c – 1.i and 1.l – 1.p. 
 
 In April 2014, during the course of Applicant’s security clearance review, he was 
interviewed by an investigator who questioned him about all the criminal charges listed 
in the SOR. Applicant admitted all the criminal acts except that he could not recall the 
two marijuana charges in 1983 and 1986. He admitted using methamphetamines from 
1983 to 1989, and again from 2001 to 2003. He claims that he no longer uses illegal 
drugs and has no intent to do so in the future. He did not present documents to support 
his recovery. Applicant recalled in detail the events that led to his conviction for felony 
credit card fraud where he served a two-year sentence in state prison. He failed to list 
this offense on his security clearance application. He also failed to list his DUI and 
possession of controlled substance offenses. In his SOR answer, he claimed that he 
listed the criminal information that he had on a DOJ printout and from his memory.2 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
2 Items 3-5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
5 
 
 
From 1977 to 2007, Applicant has been arrested and often convicted of 
numerous criminal offenses. I find that both disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s most recent offense was in 2007. He has shown a steady pattern of 
criminal activity since 1977. There has not been a sufficient amount of time to determine 
whether his rehabilitative efforts will be successful. His past criminal behavior casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Under these circumstances, 
his last criminal act is not sufficiently attenuated considering his behavior in its totality. 
AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence of his 
rehabilitative efforts to justify full mitigation. AG ¶ 32(d) does not apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
6 
 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
The same rationale that applied to the Guideline J concerns, also applies here. 
AG ¶ 16(c) applies. He also failed to list many of his criminal charges on his security 
clearance application. He claims he put the information on his security clearance 
application that was listed on a DOJ printout that he possessed and from what he 
remembered of the incidents. I do not find it credible that he did not remember a felony 
for which he was convicted and sentenced to two years’ prison time, which he served. 
He deliberately failed to list his felony charges, as well as his alcohol and drug charges 
on his security clearance application in 2014. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s 
falsifications. Falsifying information on a security clearance application is not a minor 
offense and doing so casts doubt on his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
He presented no evidence to support his assertion that he has stopped using drugs, nor 
evidence that he received counseling. Although nine years have passed since his last 
criminal offense, his extensive past criminal history over the preceding 30 years casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) do 
not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant engaged in criminal 
conduct over a long period of time. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline J, 
criminal activity and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
