   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-02887 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not make sufficient progress resolving the debts alleged in his 
statement of reasons (SOR). He did not present any evidence of any payments to his 
SOR creditors. He did not provide any correspondence from or to creditors showing 
settlement offers or attempts to negotiate payment plans. Financial considerations 
security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.       
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On September 4, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) On January 22, 
2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued Applicant an SOR pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,  Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective 
on September 1, 2006. The SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
   
 
2 
 
 
On February 20, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a decision without a hearing. On April 27, 2016, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On May 4, 2016, Applicant received the 
FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. On December 22, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits. (Items 1-5)  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f. He 
also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 69 years old, and from August 1968 to November 2009, he worked as 
a chief executive officer (CEO) for a corporation. (Item 2) In August 2014, he accepted 
employment with a defense contractor that entails access to classified information. (Item 
2) From August 2011 to February 2012, he worked as a 3D detailer for a company. (Item 
2) In 1971, he received a bachelor’s degree. 
 
Applicant served in the Army inactive reserve from 1971 to 1977, and he received 
an honorable discharge. (Item 2) In 1971, he married, and his two children were born in 
1977 and 1980. (Item 5)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 In his September 4, 2014 SCA, Applicant said a bank cancelled his company’s line 
of credit in 2009.2 Applicant personally guaranteed the line of credit, and the bank placed 
a lien against Applicant’s home. Another company, which had provided insurance 
guarantees or bonding for Applicant’s corporation, placed a $495,000 lien against 
Applicant’s homestead. (Item 5) He said the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g for $55,000 was not a 
personal debt, and he was challenging it in the courts. He said he was late three weeks 
on a monthly payment, and a property he owned with a mortgage of $220,000 went into 
foreclosure in 2009.3   
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is Appellant’s September 
4, 2014 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) 
 
3Applicant’s SOR does not allege that he owed $495,000 to a creditor or that he owed $220,000 in 
relation to a mortgage that went into foreclosure. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), 
the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered 
stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
   
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports and SOR 
response. The status of his SOR debts is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a collection account debt for $681. Applicant said the creditor 
informed him the debt was charged off. (Item 3) He is able to pay the debt; however, he 
does not know where to send the check. (Item 3) See SOR ¶ 1.h infra.  
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.g and said 
they resulted from the collapse of his business in 2009. (SOR response) Those debts are 
as follows: SOR ¶ 1.b is a charged-off bank debt for $6,830; SOR ¶ 1.c is a charged-off 
bank debt for $21,124; SOR ¶ 1.d is a commercial collection co-maker account for 
$266,146; SOR ¶ 1.e is a charged-off bank debt for $21,706; SOR ¶ 1.f is a charged-off 
bank debt for $13,886; and SOR ¶ 1.g is a charged-off bank debt for $55,676.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a charged-off account for $1,443. The debt is owed to the same 
creditor as in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 3) Applicant indicated he believed the debt needed an 
explanation. (Item 3) I have credited Applicant with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
because the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.a are duplications of each other.   
 
Applicant explained that his bank “without just cause, demanded payment of his 
company’s credit line.”4 His company was very busy at that time, and his company’s credit 
was “maxed out.” “Due to slow receipt of payments,” he could not pay down the credit 
line. The “bank foreclosed on the company,” and the company was forced to close, ending 
employment for 14 employees. He accused the bank of acting illegally and of destroying 
a thriving vibrant business. He associated the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 
1.g with the collapse of his company. He said he made an agreement to pay the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.g; however, the court made a mistake, and “no payments have been required of 
me.”   
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. There is no 
evidence that he violated security rules, abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs. Department 
Counsel emphasized the lack of mitigating evidence, debt payments, or other resolution 
of the SOR debts. (FORM at 2)   
 
The file lacks supporting documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to 
pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent accounts alleged 
                                            
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-
00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). These 
two allegations will not be considered because there is insufficient factual development in the record to 
know that happened with these two large debts. 
  
4The source for the information in his paragraph is Applicant’s February 19, 2016 SOR response. 
(Item 3)  
   
 
4 
 
 
in the SOR. There is no evidence of Applicant’s income, and he did not provide a budget 
or personal financial statement. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating 
documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial problems and 
other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt 
of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, 
rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any 
objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an 
Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this 
FORM. (FORM at 3)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
   
 
5 
 
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
   
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports and SOR response. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
   
 
7 
 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s stated efforts to resolve his delinquent debt do not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to any of his SOR debts. Applicant did not provide 
enough details about what he did to address his SOR debts. He did not describe receipt 
of financial counseling.    
 
After crediting Applicant with mitigating SOR ¶ 1.a as a duplication, seven 
unresolved SOR debts for $386,811 remain to be addressed. Applicant did not provide 
sufficient documentation relating to his SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as 
checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving 
that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from any 
creditors to establish maintenance of contact with creditors;6 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a 
belief; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements 
to show that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress 
or resolution of his debts. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) for any 
other SOR debts because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the 
existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all 
the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
  
                                            
6“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
   
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 69-year-old former CEO of a corporation. In August 2014, he applied 
for employment with a defense contractor that entails access to classified information. 
From August 2011 to February 2012, he worked as a 3D detailer for a company. From 
August 1968 to November 2009, he worked as a CEO for a corporation. In 1971, he 
received a bachelor’s degree. He served in the Army inactive reserve from 1971 to 1977, 
and he received an honorable discharge.   
   
Applicant has a history of financial problems. He had financial problems beginning 
in 2009 when his company’s line of credit was called by his bank. His company went out 
of business, and substantial debts resulted. After crediting Applicant with mitigating SOR 
¶ 1.a as a duplication, seven unresolved SOR debts totaling $386,811 remain to be fully 
addressed. He provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary 
evidence of payments to his other SOR creditors, payment plans, or his communications 
to those seven SOR creditors. He did not provide documentation showing his attempts to 
resolve any of his SOR debts in good faith. His actions show lack of financial responsibility 
and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented financial 
progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
   
 
9 
 
 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.h:  Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
