       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-06288
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 8, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIPs) December 2, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On May 4, 2016, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 28, 2016, and he requested a hearing
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative Judge.  This case was
assigned to this Administrative Judge on July 19, 2016.  A notice of hearing was issued
on August 12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 13, 2016.  At the hearing the
Government presented six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6,
which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented eight exhibits, referred
to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through H, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant
called one witness, and he also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open
2
until close of business on September 27, 2016 to allow the Applicant to provide
additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit,
referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on September 21, 2016.  Based upon a review
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 57 years old, and divorced with one child.  He has a Bachelor’s
degree in Electrical Engineering.  He is currently employed as a Software Design
Engineer with a defense contractor and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in
connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
There are ten delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Applicant admitted each of
the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.  Credit reports of the Applicant
dated December 27, 2014; July 15, 2015; and July 2, 2016, which include all three
credit reporting agencies, reflect that he is indebted to each of the creditors set forth in
the SOR in an amount totaling $130,000 in non-tax related debt, and approximately
$150,000 in Federal tax debt.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3, and 4.)  Applicant has worked
in the defense industry for over twenty-five years.  He has also held a security clearance
in the past and has never violated DoD security regulations or company policy.  He has
been working for his current employer since November 2014.
During his marriage to his second wife from 2003 to 2008, Applicant paid his bills
on time.  His credit report dated June 19, 2007, shows that he was in good standing.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  Applicant testified that his wife was a big spender and she had
three children when he married her.  When they divorced in 2008, Applicant incurred
certain debts from the marriage that he was required by court order to pay.  Applicant
explained that he was unable to pay the debts for several reasons.  First, he was a self-
employed single father raising a son.  He maintained the home and all of the bills
associated with providing for his son.  Second, as a self-employed contractor at the
time, he fell behind on his state and Federal quarterly tax payments from 2008 to 2011.
He became indebted to the IRS for delinquent taxes in the amount of $40,690 for tax
year 2008; $32,729 for tax year 2009; and $74,572 for tax year 2010.  As of January
2014 these taxes remained owing.  (SOR allegations 1.h., 1.i., and 1.j.)  
  
3
Applicant stated that he always filed his income tax returns on time.  In January
2010, in an attempt to pay his taxes, he set up a payment plan with the state and made
his first payment.  As time passed, the penalties and interest continued to accumulate,
and he fell farther behind.  He currently owes the state taxing authorities $5,500.22.
(Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  In order to pay his taxes Applicant withdrew $172,999  from his
IRA in January 2014.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  He provided a copy of his check showing
that he paid $152,677.13 to the Internal Revenue Service to pay off his back taxes
owed for tax years 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)
Applicant also provided copies of the release of federal tax liens for tax years 2008,
2009, 2010 and 2011.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  In 2012, Applicant thought that his tax
debt was resolved.  After filing his 2013 income tax returns, however, he learned that he
had miscalculated the tax liability for withdrawing the monies from his IRA.  He has not
considered that this had bumped him into a higher tax bracket for tax year 2013.  His
new tax bill for the state was $19,688.23.  He owed the IRS a balance of $21,241.40.
At this point, Applicant started an installment agreement with the IRS.  Since then he
has made his payments and used his 2012 tax refund to pay the debt owed.   He now
owes nothing to the IRS.  He owes the state $5,500.22.  He is making payments to the
state of $650 monthly.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C, and Tr. p. 55.)        
To explore his options, Applicant contacted a credit counseling agency to assist
him in resolving his debt incurred during the marriage, but he never enrolled in the
program.  (Tr. p. 47).  The debts he incurred in 2008 from the marriage remain
outstanding. 
1.a.  A delinquent credit card account that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $47,693.  (Tr. p. 51.)        
  
1.b.  A delinquent credit card account that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $30,651. (Tr. p. 52.)    
1.c.  A delinquent credit card account that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $18,545.  (Tr. p. 52.)   
1.d.  A delinquent credit card account that was placed for for collection in the
approximate amount of $15,186.  (Tr. pp. 52-53.)     
1.e.  A delinquent credit card account that was charged off in the approximate amount
of $10,145.  (Tr. p. 53.)   
1.f.  A delinquent credit card account that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $7,736.  (Tr. p. 53-54) 
1.g.  A delinquent credit card account that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $3,652.
4
Applicant testified that he plans to resolve his taxes first and then address his
other debts.  He plans to get some advice first because he is not sure how to do it.  He
now receives a salary from his employer so he does not anticipate any future tax issues.
    
A good friend who grew up with him testified that he knows the Applicant very
well and for many years.  In the past, Applicant has borrowed $10,000 to $20,000 from
him to help pay his bills and survive.  (Tr. p. 63.)  He knew about Applicant’s difficult
marriage and the money his wife was spending.  He believes the Applicant to be reliable
and trustworthy, and a great guy.  He believes Applicant to be a man of integrity and
responsibility.  
   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
5
     b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
6
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence in a nut shell shows that Applicant experienced a period of financial
hardship in 2008 when he and second wife divorced.  He took on the responsibility of
being a single parent, raising his son and providing for his financial support.  He also
incurred debt from the marriage that he has not addressed.  He fell behind on his taxes.
His taxes grew enormous over time, but he has worked diligently to resolve them.  He
now owes only about $5,500 in back taxes to the state.  The IRS is now paid off, and
the liens are released.  But he still remains indebted in the amount of approximately
$130,000 in personal credit card debt that has not been addressed at all.
              
Applicant’s history of excessive indebtedness, without sufficient mitigation,
demonstrates a pattern of unreliability.  Although he has shown some efforts to resolve
his indebtedness, he has not shown enough.  His delinquent debts are excessive and
owing.  Without more, Applicant has failed to establish that he is financially responsible. 
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has not met his burden
of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  His circumstances have precluded
him from showing financial responsibility, and he has not demonstrated the eligibility
requirements for access to classified information.  His history of excessive indebtedness
does not demonstrate that he can properly handle he financial affairs.  He remains
excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  Assuming that he demonstrates
a history and pattern of financial responsibility, including the fact that he has not
acquired any new debt that he is unable to pay, he may be eligible for a security
clearance sometime in the future.  However, he is not eligible now.  Considering all of
the evidence, Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  It can be argued that Mitigating Condition 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances applies.
7
However, this mitigating condition is not controlling.  Applicant has simply been unable
to address his debt incurred during the marriage since 2008.  He could benefit from
some intense financial counseling.  In this case, none of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, supports a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
 
Subpara.  1.a.      Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.b      Against the Applicant.
                     Subpara.  1.c.          Against the Applicant.
                 Subpara.  1.d.      Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.e Against the Applicant.
                                           Subpara.  1.f.      Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.g      Against the Applicant.
                     Subpara.  1.h.          For the Applicant.
                 Subpara.  1.i.      For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.j For the Applicant.
8
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
