                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-06481
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Scott L. Neinas, Attorney At Law, The Edmunds Law Firm 
November 8, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated January 7, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On April 27, 2016, the Department of
Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
“Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 26, 2016, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals.  On July 25, 2016, the case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative
Judge for processing.  A notice of hearing was issued on August 14, 2016, scheduling
the hearing for September 14, 2016.  The Government offered five exhibits, referred to
as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection.  Applicant
presented ten exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through J, which were also
admitted without objection.  Applicant called three witnesses and testified on his own
behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on September 28, 2016, to
allow Applicant to submit additional documentation.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
was received on September 22, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 31 years old and married with two children.  He has a high school
diploma.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an Alternate Comstat Custodian. 
He is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s
Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant began working for his current employer in July 2006. 
He has held a security clearance since 2010.
Applicant has a history of illegal drug use that includes marijuana and cocaine. 
He began using marijuana at the age of 17 in about July 2003.  Applicant graduated
from high school, his friends left to college, and he stayed at home.  His parents
divorced, and he went to live with his father.  He used marijuana as a social thing, about
once a month.  He frequently used it with his father.  As time passed, his use of
marijuana continued and increased.  By January 2004, while attending community
college, Applicant found that by using marijuana, he was able to focus better.    
In September 2005, Applicant found it more difficult to function on a day to day
basis, and he continued to use marijuana.  At this point, he was using it almost daily,
and felt addicted to the drug.  (Tr. p. 74.)  He continued to use marijuana at various
frequencies, at times cutting back on his use, and other times trying to quit altogether,
but always having to go back to marijuana to stabilize himself, until 2010 when he got
married.  Following his marriage in 2010, he completely stopped using marijuana for
about six to eight months.  (Tr. p. 78.)  His wife did not use marijuana nor did she know
that he used marijuana.    
In 2012, Applicant was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD).  He felt addicted to marijuana as it helped him to slow his mind down.  He used
it on a regular basis, with is father, about two to three times a week.  About this time, his
wife was pregnant with pre-clampsia.  Their unborn son was premature and not
growing.  His wife and son’s life’s were in danger.  The day his son was born,
Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with cancer.  Applicant was self-medicating himself to
deal with the stress.  He states that he continued to use marijuana until April 2014.  It
was then that he decided that he was done with illegal drugs.  After his wife completed
chemotherapy and got better, and his son grew healthier, Applicant was tired of hiding
his marijuana use from his wife.  His illegal drug use took a heavy toll on his marriage
2
relationship and he needed help.  Applicant, on his own, enrolled in an eight week, one-
on-one drug rehabilitation treatment program, which he successfully completed.           
        
In September 2005 Applicant also began using cocaine, which he continued until
2010.  He used it with family members, including his brother, cousin and father.  He
states that he really did not enjoy it, but only used it for social purposes.  He used
cocaine about five separate times, and last used cocaine just before he got married in
2010.  Applicant was working for his current employer and held a security clearance at
that time.     
Applicant testified that he stopped using illegal drugs in April 2014.  He is now
clean and sober.  He explained that he is now an active member of his church and he
has a support team that he trusts and can lean on.  He now manages his ADHD without
illegal drugs.  He is on a Paleo diet, essentially no grains or processed foods.  Two
months after starting the diet he noticed the effects which have reduced his ADHD
symptoms about 90 percent.  (Tr. p. 92.)  Applicant submitted the results of two drug
screening tests he took in August 2016, which were negative.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  
A letter from the Applicant’s supervisor states that in his opinion Applicant has
demonstrated trustworthiness and excellence in his work performance.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit H.)   
Four witnesses, that include the Applicant’s Christian counselor, the company’s
Senior Director of Security and Environmental Health, a friend and life group member,
and a pastor, collectively confirmed their belief and observation that Applicant is
reliable, trustworthy and responsible in every aspect.  He is recommended for a security
clearance.  (Tr. pp. 25-67.)  
Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s worship leader, pastor, life group
member, bible study teacher, and other friends collectively indicate that Applicant
embodies the characteristics of someone who can be trusted.  He is dedicated to his
faith, family and friends.   He is a hard worker, who is highly professional, and extremely
honest.  He is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)
A letter from Applicant’s Christian counselor dated May 16, 2016, indicates
Applicant came to her after being 3 months sober.  He has continued with his drug
treatment counseling for self improvement.  She states that she is confident that
Applicant can be trusted with any areas of confidentiality and security.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit G.)    
Applicant’s performance appraisals from 2009 through 2014, reflect that he
consistently fulfills his job requirements in every category.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)   
3
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse; 
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation; and
26.(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including
but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of
abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18 - 19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
4
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in illegal drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
5
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant. 
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of
the SOR.  
Applicant’s history of marijuana use began when he was 17 years old and
continued until he was 29, just two years ago.  He also used cocaine during a five year
period between 2005 and 2010.  His ADHD diagnosis and personal tragedies have
also contributed to his instability but even so, the extent of this drug use is shocking. 
Applicant’s patten of use became so regular that he became dependant upon and
addicted to marijuana.  Most troubling is the fact that he used marijuana after having
been granted a security clearance.  Applicant knew at the time that his use of illegal
drugs was against state and Federal law.  He also knew that it was contrary to his
company’s policies and against DoD regulations.  This past conduct clearly
demonstrates a lapse in sound judgment and raises serious questions about his
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  Applicant states that since April 2014, after
enrolling in and successfully completing a drug treatment program he has been clean
and sober for 24 months.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug
abuse; and 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia 25.(g)
any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  Mitigating
Conditions 26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and
26.(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not
limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional are also applicable, but not
controlling in this case.       
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Only recently has Applicant decided to
stop using illegal drugs.  He is commended for enrolling in a drug-treatment program
and following up with Christian counseling to help maintain his drug free lifestyle.  At
this time, however, he has not earned the privilege of holding a security clearance.  He
has used illegal drugs consistently for over ten years, and has only been drug-free for
about 24 months.  Considering the extensive nature of his drug use that resulted in his 
addicted to marijuana, more time without drug use is required in order to demonstrate
the level of maturity, character, judgment and responsibility, expected of an employee
who works for the defense industry and has access to classified information. 
Applicant’s past illegal conduct is still too extensive, too serious, too recent, and a clear
indicator of poor judgment and unreliability that preclude him from security clearance
eligibility at this time.
6
  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must be determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest.  Based upon the conduct outlined here, this
Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does not meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.       
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
7
