 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-03915 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bradley P. Moss, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant engaged in sodomy with a 15-year-old child. He was charged with a 
felony, and he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor-level offense. He is currently on 
probation. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated as a duplication; however, criminal 
conduct and sexual behavior security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (GE 1) On March 2, 2016, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct), D (sexual 
behavior), and E (personal conduct). (HE 2) 
 
On April 21, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On June 29, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 8, 2016, the case was assigned 
to me. On August 31, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for September 22, 2016. (HE 1)  
Applicant’s hearing was conducted as scheduled. 
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
three exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 11-13; 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-C) On September 30, 2016, 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. Applicant was authorized until 
October 4, 2016, to submit post-hearing evidence. (Tr. 7, 88) Applicant submitted two 
post-hearing documents, which were admitted without objection. (AE D-E)   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted with explanations the underlying factual 
predicate for all of the SOR allegations. (HE 3) He also provided extenuating and 
mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old senior cyber security engineer employed by a defense 
contractor. (Tr. 7-9; GE 1) In 2006, he graduated from a university with a bachelor of 
science degree. (Tr. 39) Applicant has worked for federal contractors and federal 
government agencies from 2008 to present. (Tr. 39) He has held a security clearance 
since 2008. (Tr. 39) He does not use illegal drugs or abuse alcohol. (Tr. 49) There is no 
evidence of a security violation.     
 
Criminal Conduct, Sexual Behavior, and Personal Conduct 
 
In April 2013, Applicant made contact with the 15-year-old female through an 
internet-dating website. (Tr. 40-41) He assumed she was 18 years old or older because 
the website indicated it was for adults (age 18 and older) and required a credit card for 
access. (Tr. 40-41, 63-64; AE E) Applicant claimed the victim told him that she was a 
high school graduate, and that she was over the age of 18. (Tr. 41-42)  
 
In early May 2013, Applicant was 28 years old. (Tr. 62) He was allowed to enter 
the victim’s parents’ residence by the victim. (Tr. 40, 48) After about ten minutes, 
Applicant and the victim went into the garage, where they engaged in consensual 
sexual activity. (Tr. 70, 74-75) Applicant was in the house about 30 minutes, when the 
victim’s parents arrived. (Tr. 70) The victim’s parents called the police and alleged 
Applicant was hiding in their garage. (GE 3 at 1) The victim’s mother told Applicant that 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the victim was only 15 years old, and Applicant responded “that he thought she did look 
kind of young.” (GE 3 at 1)   
 
When the police arrived, Applicant waived his rights, and was questioned. (Tr. 
72) The police report indicates “The defendant would not first admit a genital contact 
even without penetration. He did admit that he touched the victim on her backside and 
on her breasts.”1 (Tr. 78; GE 3 at 4) The police suspended interrogation of Applicant 
and collected additional evidence, including the victim’s statement that he ejaculated on 
her face and chest. (GE 3 at 4) The police informed Applicant that she said he 
ejaculated on her, and then Applicant admitted “to ejaculating on her lips and into her 
mouth.” (GE 3 at 5)  Applicant admitted that he removed the victim’s clothing, and the 
victim was naked. (Tr. 80; GE 3 at 5) Later Applicant claimed she put his ejaculate into 
her mouth. (GE 3 at 5) At his hearing, Applicant claimed he was truthful to the police. 
(Tr. 72) Applicant’s statement to the police was videotaped. (GE 3 at 4-5) Applicant did 
not provide a copy of the videotape or a transcript of the police interview or his guilty 
plea proceeding.  
 
A psychiatrist directly evaluated Applicant for 11 hours, conducted extensive 
testing, and concluded Applicant was not a sexual predator. (Tr. 47; AE C) He does not 
have any psychiatric disorder, and he is not sexually attracted to children or minors. (Tr. 
47; AE C) He is intelligent, and he regrets his offense. (AE C) One test puts Applicant 
“into the bottom 1%, suggesting at most an 11.7% chance of re-offense within a year.” 
(AE C at 5) Thus, he credited Applicant with being unlikely to reoffend. (AE C) No 
treatment or medication was recommended. (Tr. 48; AE C) 
 
Applicant was charged with the felony-level crime of third degree sexual assault.2 
(Tr. 46) In January 2014, Applicant entered a guilty plea to a misdemeanor-level crime 
                                            
1Applicant’s SOR does not allege that Applicant lied to the police when initially questioned about 
the scope of his sexual conduct with the victim. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be 
considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). The allegation that he initially lied to the police will not be considered for any purpose 
because Applicant has not had adequate notice and a full opportunity to collect and present evidence of 
mitigation regarding this information. 
 
2The offense of “sexual offense in the third degree” prohibits a person from “engag[ing] in a 
sexual act with another if the victim is 14 or 15 years old, and the person performing the sexual act is at 
least 21 years old.” (HE 4) The statutory penalty states, “A person who violates this section is guilty of the 
felony of sexual offense in the third degree and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 10 
years.” (HE 4) If Applicant were convicted of the crime of sexual offense in the third degree, he would 
have been required to register as a sex offender. See Ochoa v. Dep't of Pub. Safety & Corr. Servs., 430 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of oral sex as a perverted practice,3 and he was sentenced to probation for three years 
with ten years suspended. (Tr. 45, 50, 59) In accordance with his pretrial agreement, 
Applicant admitted that he and the victim engaged in fellatio or oral sex. (Tr. 77)4 His 
probation will end in January 2017. (Tr. 60) He complied with the terms of his probation. 
(Tr. 59) He was not required to register as a sex offender because of the level of his 
conviction. (Tr. 46, 60) See also notes 2 and 3, supra. Applicant has not communicated 
with the victim since the incident, and he does not maintain access to any dating 
websites. (Tr. 45) He has dated two women, ages 25 and 31, after his arrest. (Tr. 60) 
He denied criminal intent; however, he accepted responsibility for behaving in a 
reckless manner.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s father has a distinguished career in education and government 
service. (Tr. 16) Applicant lives with his parents. (Tr. 18) Applicant has complied with 
the terms of his probation. (Tr. 18, 23) He does not use illegal drugs, abuse alcohol, or 
commit criminal offenses (except for the SOR conduct). (Tr. 18-19) Applicant exhibits 
exceptional talent with music, computers, and aircraft. (Tr. 19) Applicant was unaware 
the minor was under the age of consent, and he feels remorse for his conduct with the 
minor. (Tr. 19-21)  
 
 A company vice president and facility security officer made a statement on 
Applicant’s behalf. (Tr. 26-27) Applicant was hired for his current sensitive position as a 
senior engineer in February 2016. (Tr. 27-29) The hiring official was aware of 
Applicant’s criminal offense because Applicant disclosed it. (Tr. 29, 33-34) Applicant 
has access to classified information. (Tr. 29) Applicant said he was unaware of the age 
of the minor; she invited him to meet with her; and he was found guilty of a 
misdemeanor. (Tr. 30) He did not read the police report supporting the criminal charge. 
(Tr. 37) Applicant received compliments for his work, professionalism, and diligence. 
(Tr. 32, 37) His statement supports Applicant’s continued access to classified 
information. (Tr. 27-32) 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Md. 315, 61 A.3d 1, 2013 Md. LEXIS 19 (2013). In the state where Applicant’s offense occurred, 
engaging in a sexual act with a 15-year-old is a “‘strict criminal liability’ offense with respect to the 
defendant’s knowledge of the ‘victim’s’ age, that the offense had no ‘mens rea element’ in this regard, and 
that ‘the availability of a defense of reasonable mistake of age cannot be read into the carnal knowledge 
between a fourteen or fifteen year old victim and a defendant who is age twenty-one or older.’” See 
Moore v. State, 388 Md. 623, 644, 882 A. 2d 256, 268 (2005). 
 
3He pleaded guilty to committing an “unnatural or perverted sexual practice.” This offense 
prohibits: “(1) tak[ing] the sexual organ of another or of an animal in the person’s mouth; (2) plac[ing] the 
person’s sexual organ in the mouth of another or of an animal; or (3) commit[ing] another unnatural or 
perverted sexual practice with another or with an animal.” (HE 5) The statutory penalty states “A person 
who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not 
exceeding 10 years or a fine not exceeding $ 1,000 or both.” (HE 5) Applicant said he was not aware of 
whether he admitted or was required to admit that his penis was placed into the victim’s mouth. (Tr. 78) 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Four witnesses, including his godfather, a friend, his lawyer in his criminal case, 
and a supervisor, provided character statements on Applicant’s behalf. (AE A, B, D, E) 
Applicant is trustworthy, responsible, diligent, and law abiding. The statements support 
reinstatement of his security clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” “(c) 
allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;” and “(d) individual is currently on 
parole or probation.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c), and 31(d) apply. In April 2013, Applicant engaged in sodomy 
with a 15-year-old female. He committed a serious offense, even though he was 
allowed to plead guilty to a misdemeanor-level offense. See notes 2 and 3 supra. His 
probation will end in January 2017.  
  
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Although none of the mitigating conditions fully apply, there are important 
mitigating factors. A psychiatrist determined: Applicant was not a sexual predator; he 
does not have any psychiatric disorder; he is not sexually attracted to children or 
minors; he is unlikely to reoffend; and no treatment or medication was recommended. 
He has an excellent employment record. He expressed regret and remorse concerning 
his sexual offense.   
 
Significant factors weighing against mitigating criminal conduct concerns remain. 
He committed a serious criminal offense. In April 2013, Applicant engaged in sodomy 
with a 15-year-old female. His crime is relatively recent. He continues to be on 
probation. More time must elapse before there is enough assurance that criminal 
conduct security concerns are unlikely to recur. Applicant is not ready to be entrusted 
with access to classified information at this time.  
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
  AG ¶ 12 describes the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
   
  AG ¶ 13 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the 
individual has been prosecuted;” and “(d) sexual behavior . . . reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.” AG ¶¶ 13(a) and 13(d) apply for the reasons stated in the previous 
section.   
 
  AG ¶ 14 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions fully apply for the reasons stated in the criminal 
conduct section. Sexual behavior security conditions are not mitigated.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR cross-alleges under the personal conduct guideline the same conduct 
alleged and discussed under the criminal conduct guideline. His sodomy with a 15-year-
old under Guidelines J and D is sufficient to warrant revocation of his security clearance 
without incorporating or applying Guideline E. The concerns under Guidelines J, D, and 
E address identical issues involving judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. All 
personal conduct security concerns described in the SOR are directly related to his 
criminal conduct and sexual behavior with the 15-year-old victim. Personal conduct 
security concerns as alleged in the SOR constitute an unwarranted duplication of the 
concerns under Guidelines J and D, and accordingly personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J, D, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old senior cyber security engineer employed by a defense 
contractor. In 2006, Applicant graduated from a university with a bachelor of science 
degree. Applicant has worked for federal contractors and federal government agencies 
from 2008 to present. He has held a security clearance since 2008. Applicant does not 
use illegal drugs or abuse alcohol. There is no evidence of a security violation.    
 
 A company vice president and facility security officer, Applicant’s father and 
godfather, his friend, his lawyer in his criminal case, and a supervisor provided 
character statements on Applicant’s behalf. He has an excellent employment record. 
The general sense of their statements is that Applicant is professional, diligent, 
trustworthy, responsible, and law abiding, except for his sodomy of a 15-year-old in 
2013. Their statements support Applicant’s continued access to classified information.  
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A psychiatrist concluded that Applicant does not have any psychiatric disorder, 
and he is unlikely to reoffend. Applicant is an intelligent person, who understands the 
importance of compliance with security rules. His acknowledgement of crime, guilty 
plea, and his evident remorse are important steps towards rehabilitation and mitigation 
of security concerns.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial and 
persuasive. Applicant committed a serious offense, sodomy with a 15-year-old female in 
April 2013. His criminal conduct is recent, and he is still on probation. There are 
unresolved questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. More time without criminal conduct is necessary to fully mitigate 
security concerns. 
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, criminal 
conduct and sexual behavior security concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
