 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02883 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on December 2, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 16, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on May 11, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 13, 2016. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. The Government’s discovery letter was marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified, but did not offer any exhibits at the hearing.  The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted exhibits 
(AE) A-B, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c - 1.h, and 1.j – 1.w. He denied ¶ 
1.b and 1.i. These admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since 2011. He has an associate’s degree. He spent some time in the 
National Guard trying to receive a commission through ROTC, but when that did not 
work out, he was administratively separated. He is divorced and has two children for 
whom he pays about $700-$800 in monthly child support. He maintains that he is 
current on that support.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 23 delinquent debts in the approximate amount of $69,952. 
The debts were listed in credit reports from January 2013, March 2015, and October 
2015, as well as his admissions in his personal subject interview (PSI) to an investigator 
in February 2013.2  
 
 During his PSI, Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to making poor 
financial decisions when he was younger by accumulating credit card debt. During his 
testimony, he expounded on the cause of his financial problems by explaining how he 
incurred federal and state tax debt by delaying filing his tax returns because he earned 
self-employment income, and he did not know how to deal with the related tax issues. 
He has not received financial counseling. No budget information was provided. The 
status of the SOR-related debts is as follows:3    
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (student loan debt $7,090): 
 
 Applicant became delinquent on this student loan debt in November 2012. His 
date of last payment was March 2015. He applied for a hardship deferment on this 
account, but no further information was offered as to that status. Applicant testified that 
all his student loan accounts were consolidated, but he had not yet set up a payment 
plan for the consolidated account. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 23-27; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2-5. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 41; Ans.; GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (consumer debt $2,848): 
 
 In his PSI, Applicant acknowledged this debt was for the purchase of two 
computers. He denied knowledge of this debt in his SOR answer. The date of last action 
on this debt was December 2012. Applicant produced no evidence of payment, 
establishment of a payment plan or documented correspondence with the creditor. This 
debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (credit card account $445): 
 
 Applicant stated that he “lost tracking” on this account. He did not provide 
documentation showing that he paid this account, set up a payment plan, or contacted 
the creditor. The date of last payment was June 2010. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (consumer account $181): 
 
 Applicant thought he closed this account in good standing. He did not present 
any documentation to support that position. He has not contacted the creditor about this 
debt. The date of his first delinquency was September 2011. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (utility account $169): 
 
 Applicant indicated he would contact this creditor. He also stated he left 
forwarding information at a previous address, but did not receive any correspondence 
from this creditor. He did not produce any documentation supporting his position. The 
unpaid status date for this account was September 2014. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (utility account $166): 
 
 Applicant indicated he would contact this creditor. He also stated he left 
forwarding information at a previous address, but did not receive any correspondence 
from this creditor. He did not produce any documentation supporting his position. The 
unpaid status date for this account was May 2014. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Ans.; GE 2-5. 
 
6 Ans.; GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 49; Ans.; GE 3. 
 
8 Ans.; GE 3. 
 
9 Ans.; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g (medical account $138): 
 
 Applicant claims this account was paid by his medical insurance. He failed to 
provide documentation to support his position. The unpaid status date for this account 
was August 2014. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h (utility account $79): 
 
 Applicant claims this account was closed with no remaining balance. He failed to 
provide documentation to support his position. The unpaid status date for this account 
was September 2015. This debt is unresolved.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i (medical account $46): 
 
 Applicant claims no knowledge of this account. The unpaid status date for this 
account was September 2015. This debt is unresolved.12 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.j – 1.p, 1.r- 1.s (state tax liens $4,153; $527; $2,999; $139; $7,352; $4,462; 
$3,123; $782; $3,709): 
 
 These state tax liens resulted from Applicant failing to pay state income taxes for 
years 2008, 2009, 2012, 2013, and 2014. He documented that he received a one-year 
hardship deferment which began July 1, 2015. As of the hearing date, he failed to 
supply documentation of a follow-on agreement with the state or proof of payment. 
These debts are unresolved.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.q (federal tax lien $24,565): 
 
 Applicant owed federal income tax debt for 2008, which resulted in the filing of a 
tax lien. He claims the tax balance is down to $7,000 owed and that he makes monthly 
payments toward this debt. Applicant documented that he made a $250 payment in 
October 2015, but failed to produce evidence of additional payments even when given 
the opportunity to do so post-hearing. This debt is unresolved.14 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 Ans.; GE 3. 
 
11 Ans.; GE 3. 
 
12 Ans.; GE 3. 
 
13 Tr. at 34-36; Ans. (Tax Express letter dated July 1, 2015); GE 3. 
 
14 Tr. at 32, 34; Ans. (IRS notice dated November 18, 2015); GE 3; AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.t (credit card account $1,259): 
 
 Applicant stated that he “lost tracking” on this account. He did not provide 
documentation showing that he paid this account, set up a payment plan, or contacted 
the creditor. The date of last action was April 2011. This debt is unresolved.15 
 
SOR ¶ 1.u (telecommunications account $374): 
 
 Applicant presented documentation showing he paid this account in June 2016. 
This debt is resolved.16 
 
SOR ¶ 1.v (student loan debt $3,930): 
 
 Applicant became delinquent on this student loan debt in November 2012. His 
date of last payment was March 2015. He applied for a hardship deferment on this 
account, but no further information was offered as to that status. Applicant testified that 
all his student loan accounts were consolidated, but he had not yet set up a payment 
plan for the consolidated account. This debt is unresolved.17 
 
SOR ¶ 1.w (student loan debt $1,416): 
 
 Applicant became delinquent on this student loan debt in June 2015. His date of 
last payment was March 2015. He applied for hardship deferment on this account, but 
no further information was offered as to that status. Applicant testified that all his 
student loan accounts were consolidated, but he had not yet set up a payment plan for 
the consolidated account. This debt is unresolved.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 52; Ans.; GE 5. 
 
16 AE B. 
 
17 Tr. at 41; Ans.; GE 3. 
 
18 Tr. at 41; Ans.; GE 3. 
 
 
6 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had 23 delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple, and his inaction on the debts shows a 
lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Although he paid one debt, he 
waited until after his hearing to take this action. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s failed to present evidence that his financial difficulties were beyond 
his control. Even if he was able to do so, he has done little to address the debt. He paid 
one debt and received a one-year deferment on paying his state tax obligations. With 
the deferment soon ending, he produced no evidence showing how he intended to pay 
his state tax liability. He produced documentary evidence of only one monthly payment 
toward his federal tax debt. Overall, the record evidence does not support that 
Applicant’s actions were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Given the unpaid status of all but 
one debt, Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Although he paid one 
debt, the remainder are unpaid with no established repayment plan. Evidence of good-
faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts is lacking. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) 
partially apply.  
 
 Applicant supplied documentary evidence to support his payment of the 
telecommunications debt, but he failed to document payment for his other disputed 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) applies only to SOR ¶ 1.u.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service and the circumstances by 
which he became indebted. However, I also considered that he has made little effort to 
resolve his financial situation. He has not established a meaningful track record of debt 
management, which causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.t:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.u:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.v – 1.w:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
