 
1 
 
 
                                                                
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00563 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct), but failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 13, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On July 1, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be granted or denied. 
  
On July 27, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 6, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 7, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On May 26, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for June 22, 2016. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, did not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which 
was received into evidence without objection. I held the record open until July 29, 
2016, to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. 
Applicant timely submitted AE B through G, which were received into evidence 
without objection. On July 5, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. After a 
thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old information technology specialist employed by a 
defense contractor since January 2011. He seeks a security clearance to enhance 
his position within his company. In addition to his job with a defense contractor, 
Applicant has also been a self-employed information specialist since January 
2009. (Tr. 15-17; GE 1) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1992. He did not pursue 
higher education beyond high school. (Tr. 17-18; GE 1) Applicant was married 
from July 1997 to November 1999, and that marriage ended by divorce. He 
remarried in July 2002. Applicant has three adult stepchildren.  His wife does not 
work outside the home. Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (Tr. 18-
22) 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
The financial concerns in this case hinge on a sole allegation of unpaid 
state taxes. Specifically, Applicant’s state tax authority filed a $86,258 tax lien 
against him in June 2009 for unpaid taxes from a former business he owned. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(SOR ¶ 1.a)  In his SOR answer, Applicant denied this allegation claiming that he 
had previously addressed his tax arrearages when he and his then lawyer 
appeared before the state tax board in 2000 and he believed, “this matter was 
cleared after the board review.” (SOR answer) However, according to state court 
records as of the hearing date, the tax lien is still valid and remains on Applicant’s 
January 2014 and December 2014 credit reports. (Tr. 29; GE 3, GE 4) 
 
Applicant’s tax problems stem from purported unpaid state taxes while he 
was a convenience store owner during the timeframe of 1996 to 1999. Some 
weeks after Applicant and his then lawyer appeared at the 2000 hearing, 
Applicant received a telephone call from his lawyer advising him the state tax 
board “found the discrepancies and that they [were] taking care of it (back taxes) 
and that we didn’t owe anything.” Based on this telephone conversation, Applicant 
assumed the matter was resolved. However, as a result of these proceedings, he 
not only learned that he still owed state taxes, but also his original tax debt had 
increased substantially as a result of penalties and interest. Applicant also 
discovered that the lawyer who represented him at the tax board hearing had 
passed away in September 2011 and the files from his case were unavailable. (Tr. 
22-26, 28, 32-34, 40-41) 
 
Applicant testified that in 2004, he started a computer-related business and 
received a state tax identification number stating, “if I had a judgment against me 
that wasn’t wavered, then how did I get another sales tax ID?” (Tr. 27; AE A) 
Applicant claimed that he received no documentation that a lien was placed on his 
home in 2009. (Tr. 27)  
 
Applicant contacted his state tax board “several times” requesting 
documentation and was advised, “this (case) dates back so far that they don’t 
have the record and they went through a new system” and “[s]ome that said we 
don’t even show that you came to the Board hearing, or Review Board hearing.” 
(Tr. 29-30, 41-43) Applicant was unable to obtain copies of the minutes from his 
tax board hearing stating, “[s]o I’m kind of in limbo.” Additionally, Applicant has 
sought his state senator’s assistance, but this avenue has not rendered any relief 
to date. (Tr. 30) According to the evidence, Applicant’s state tax debt remains 
unpaid and is mounting. Applicant challenged the tax lien on his credit report and 
the state tax board verified their claim as recently as 2015. (Tr. 30-31, 34-40, 44; 
GE 2 – 4) 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a letter dated July 26, 2016 from the 
widow-attorney of his former attorney. She advised that she had taken over her 
late husband’s law practice after his death on September 1, 2011. She stated that 
she searched her late husband’s files and was unable to find anything relating to 
Applicant. She surmised this may be due to a fire that occurred “some months 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
prior to his death, or that the file had been closed many years prior to his death.” 
(AE B) Applicant also submitted documents from his state tax board dated 
September 7, 2000 that confirmed the state tax board’s decision that Applicant 
owed back taxes as well as a copy of the state tax lien filed on June 19, 2009 
against him in the amount of $86,258.73. (AE B-G) 
 
Apart from this outstanding state tax lien, Applicant’s financial situation is 
very solid. He has no financial hardships and is “blessed beyond belief.” However, 
if the lien is determined to be valid, he is not in a position to pay it off especially 
taking into account the original amount owed has increased substantially as a 
result of interest and penalties. (Tr. 38) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his January 2014 SF-86, he failed to list his 
June 2009 $86,248 state tax lien when asked whether he had a lien placed 
against his property for failing to pay taxes or other debts in the past seven years. 
(SOR ¶ 2.a) Applicant credibly testified that he first became aware of this tax lien 
during his February 24, 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI). Applicant stated that he was “floored” when the investigator 
informed him that he had a pending state tax lien. As noted, Applicant stated that 
he was granted a state business license in 2004 and no lien had been placed on a 
house he had built before 2009. (Tr. 31-32, 37) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national 
security emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of 
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have 
access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the 
Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting 
the criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole 
person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
with access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty 
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 
12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or 
implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, 
conditions in the personal or professional history of the applicant that may 
disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information. The 
Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue her security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts 
to generate funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  In ISCR 
Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can 
normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the 
government’s obligations under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent 
allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish 
either that [he or] she is not responsible for the debt or that matters 
in mitigation apply. (internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of 
delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports and in the 
evidence presented.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole, I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully applicable to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. The available information shows that 
2009 state tax lien in question has been validated as recently as 2015 and 
remains a concern.  
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts or 
enforcing tax laws.1 Rather, the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the security guidelines in the 
Directive.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant credibly stated when he completed his SF-86 he believed his 
problems with the state tax board were resolved. He had retained a lawyer to 
represent him at the state tax board and his lawyer advised him the matter was 
resolved. Applicant believed that his tax problems were behind him. He opened a 
new business and was given a state tax identification number after his purported 
tax delinquency and built a new home. Applicant first became aware of the 2009 
tax lien filed against him during his February 2014 OPM PSI.  
 
As noted, his efforts to resolve his tax problems to date have been 
unsuccessful. He was candid and forthright at his hearing about his tax problems. 
I conclude Applicant’s alleged falsification of his SF-86 is unsubstantiated. 
Although he provided false information on his January 2014 SF-86, AG ¶ 17(f) 
fully applies. The falsification allegations are not substantiated. I am satisfied he 
                                                          
1
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
did not deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose his delinquent debts with 
intent to deceive.2 I find “For Applicant” in the Findings section of this decision 
with respect to SOR ¶ 2.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guidelines F and E is incorporated in this whole-person 
section. However, further comments are warranted. 
Applicant is a 42-year-old information technology specialist employed by a 
defense contractor since January 2011. He is a law-abiding citizen and a 
                                                          
2
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, 
stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the 
burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not 
establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission 
occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it 
was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had 
established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion 
had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. 
June 9, 2004)). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
productive member of society. There is no evidence to suggest that he is not 
current on his day-to-day expenses. 
 
However, I am unable to overlook a substantial and long-standing state tax 
lien that appears to be valid from the available evidence. Applicant’s testimony 
described an unfortunate series of events that included his appearance at the 
state tax board in 2000 in which he believed that his tax problems were resolved. 
Applicant’s efforts to retrieve records from his state tax board have netted 
negative results. His efforts to challenge the validity of the state tax lien on his 
credit report were met with equally negative results. Applicant also contacted the 
widow-attorney of his former attorney, and she was unable to locate any records 
that would corroborate his version of events. As noted, I am unable to ignore this 
ongoing state tax debt that continues to accrue interest and penalties. 
Regrettably, after weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the 
facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
adjudicative process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
adjudicative guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
PARAGRAPH 1, GUIDELINE F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a:  Against Applicant 
 
PARAGRAPH 2, GUIDELINE E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
