 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07871 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 18, 2015, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 16, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 22, 2016. She 
answered the SOR in writing on March 20, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 18, 2016, 
and I received the case assignment on June 2, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on August 31, 2016, and I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on September 16, 2016. The Government offered Exhibits 1 
 
2 
 
 
through 3, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf 
and submitted Exhibits A through J, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on September 28, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all ten allegations. She also 
provided additional information to support her request for a finding of eligibility for a 
security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 31 years old, divorced twice and does not have any children. 
Applicant’s husbands abused her and she divorced them. Her second husband 
controlled her finances and would not let her pay her debts, instead using her income 
and assets for his own benefit. She testified she learned from her two marriages to 
abusive men not to repeat those relationships. Prior to that marriage, she had paid her 
debts on time and purchased her home when she was 21 years old. She now lives with 
her sister and has no regular employment. She served in the U.S. Air Force for eight 
years, rising to the rank of staff sergeant. Applicant deployed overseas four times during 
her service. She is three classes short of having a bachelor’s degree. She had a 
security clearance while serving in the Air Force. She receives about $1,700 monthly in 
Veterans Administration (VA) benefits. (Tr. 14, 26, 30-42; Exhibit 1) 
 
 The SOR lists ten delinquent debts owed by Applicant. Two debts are duplicates. 
They total $139,480. The debts include a mortgage in foreclosure, two credit cards, a 
credit union loan, three telephone debts, a power company debt, and two medical 
debts. Applicant resolved all of her delinquent debts by payment, or installment payment 
agreements, or other methods. (Tr. 40-53; Exhibits 1-3, A to J) 
 
 Applicant owed $1,447 to a credit card company on a judgment (Subparagraph 
1.a). This debt is also listed in the SOR for $1,293 (Subparagraph 1.d). Applicant 
submitted as an exhibit a release of judgment showing the debt was paid. She settled 
the debt for $723, paying $600 on March 2, 2016, and $123 on April 2, 2016. This debt 
is resolved. (Tr. 43-45; Exhibits 2, 3, A, B, I) 
 
 The mortgage on Applicant’s house was written off and she was released from 
the mortgage balance of $138,476, according to the letter from the mortgage holder 
dated February 9, 2016 (Subparagraph 1.b). This mortgage debt is resolved. (Tr. 47, 
48; Exhibits 2, 3, A, C, I) 
 
 Applicant owed a credit union $12,497 (Subparagraph 1.c). She settled the debt 
for $6,789.60 payable in 18 monthly installments of $377.20 until the final payment in 
September 30, 2017. This installment arrangement is dated April 4, 2016. Applicant 
testified she makes all her monthly payments regularly from her disability income. This 
debt is being resolved. (Tr. 50; Exhibits 2, 3, A, D, I) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owed three debts to a telephone company (Subparagraphs 1.e, 1.f, 
and 1.g). She settled each account and paid the settlement amounts. She settled one 
account for $377.33, the second debt for $310.79, and the third debt for $375.46, about 
a third of each original debt. These debts were settled and paid on February 24, 2016. 
They are resolved. (Tr. 50-52; Exhibits 2, 3, A, E, F, G, I) 
 
  Applicant owed an electric power company $339 for service provided to her 
former residence (Subparagraph 1.h). She resolved this debt in February 2013. (Tr. 51, 
52; Exhibits 2, 3, H, I) 
 
 Applicant has two medical debts for $137 and $86, which resulted from an injury 
suffered in a job after her military service (Subparagraphs 1.i and 1.j). The employer’s 
worker’s compensation plan paid these debts and they are resolved. (Tr. 52; Exhibits 2, 
3, A, H, I) 
 
 Applicant submitted a monthly budget showing her disability income and her 
expenses with a net remainder income of $561.23. Applicant does not have any credit 
cards, using only debit cards. Her federal and state income taxes are paid. (Tr. 49, 55, 
56; Exhibits 2, 3, J)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $139,480 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present 
time that remained unpaid. Applicant has nine delinquent debts listed in the SOR (two 
debts being duplicates of each other). The evidence raises all of the above security 
concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Four conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s second husband did not allow her to spend money on her financial 
obligations. He controlled her and her spending. Her financial situation occurred under 
unusual circumstances in her second marriage. She divorced that husband and 
resumed control of her finances. She resolved her debts. It is unlikely to recur because 
Applicant testified she learned her lesson about abusive and controlling husbands. Her 
situation and response  to the actions of her former husband do not cast doubt on  
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20 (a) is 
established by her responsible actions in resolving her debts.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems arose during her second marriage because her 
husband abused her and controlled her money. He would not allow her to pay her 
debts, so they became delinquent. Her home went into foreclosure. She finally divorced 
that man and worked to resolve her debts as she applied for other employment and 
relied on her disability income to repay her debts. AG ¶ 20 (b) is established by her 
responsible actions in resolving her debts.  
 
Applicant paid her debts in an orderly manner. Therefore, there are clear 
indications from the evidence she presented that the financial problems are under 
control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) is established.  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant paid her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s 
good-faith efforts to repay her delinquent debts.  
 
The remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable to the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant resolved her debts. She 
acted responsibly. She has not repeated the actions leading to her financial 
delinquencies. She realizes her error in marrying her second husband who abused her 
and took her money.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
