 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02858 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $16,000 in delinquent debt over the past decade 
that remains unresolved. She also deliberately failed to disclose her felony conviction 
for Breach of Trust with Fraudulent Intent, Value Greater than $5,000 that resulted from 
her theft of about $15,000 from a former employer. She did not mitigate resulting 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
On January 24, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). (Item 1.) The action was taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DoD 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, 
as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
 
2 
 
 
On December 26, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On February 
8, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
eight Items. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed Applicant a 
complete copy of the FORM on February 8, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 17, 2016, and was provided 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. She did not submit any information within the time 
provided, made no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did not 
request additional time to respond. On September 9, 2016, DOHA assigned the case to 
me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. She has been married since November 1994, and has 
two adult children. She is a high school graduate, and has never served in the military 
or held Federal civilian employment. (Item 3.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 13 delinquent debts, totaling $16,603.1 In 
her response to the SOR, she denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 
1.o, on the basis that she was unable to verify them on her credit reports. She admitted 
the remaining eight delinquencies, totaling $15,156. She also admitted SOR ¶ 1.p, 
alleging her felony charge and conviction for Breach of Trust with Fraudulent Intent, 
Value Greater than $5,000. In response to SOR ¶ 2.a, Applicant admitted that she 
falsely answered, “No,” to the e-QIP question that asked whether she had ever been 
charged with a felony offense, but said that she was confused by the question. (Item 2.) 
Applicant’s admissions, including those made during her interview with an OPM 
investigator on February 26, 2013, and adopted by her under oath on October 23, 2015 
(Item 4), are incorporated in the following findings.  
 
 All of the delinquencies alleged in the SOR are documented on Applicant’s 
February 2, 2013 full-data credit report obtained by the OPM. (Item 6.) The five debts 
that Applicant said, in 2015, she could not verify on her credit reports were older debts 
that may have no longer been eligible for reporting by that time. She did not provide 
copies of the credit reports to which she referred. There is substantial evidence to 
support the existence of all SOR-listed debts, and Applicant provided no evidence that 
any of them were either resolved or subject to legitimate dispute. Eleven of those debts 
involved less than $700 and eight involved less than $400. These debts became 
delinquent at various times over the past ten years. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 5; Item 6; Item 
7.) 
 
 In 1997, Applicant and a coworker conspired to steal about $15,000 in customer 
payments from their employer over the course of a month. They were caught, and in 
October 1999 Applicant pled guilty to, and was convicted of, Breach of Trust with 
Fraudulent Intent, Value Greater than $5,000. She was sentenced to ten years 
                                                          
1 Due to typographical error, the SOR omitted ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i.  
 
3 
 
 
confinement (all suspended), five years of probation, community service, and restitution 
of $450 per month for five years. She did not pay the restitution, resulting in court-
ordered service of 45 days in jail with daytime work release. (Item 4; Item 8.)  
 
 Applicant denied having ever been charged with a felony offense in responding 
to Section 22 on her January 2013 e-QIP. She continued to deny her conviction during 
her February 2013 interview with an OPM investigator until confronted with court 
records showing her arrest and conviction. She then said that she did not disclose this 
felony conviction because her public defender informed her that the offense was 
expunged and no longer on her record. (Item 4.) The conviction has not been 
expunged. (Item 8.) In her response to the SOR, for the first time, she said that she was 
confused by the question without further explanation. (Item 2.) Both the question, and 
the facts of her felony conviction, are clear and unambiguous. I find her false denial of 
the conviction on her e-QIP to have been a deliberate falsification.  
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling or budget estimates from 
which to analyze her current financial situation. No character witnesses described her 
judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided without a 
hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt over the past ten years that 
she has been unable or unwilling to repay. She also fraudulently stole or embezzled 
about $15,000 from a former employer. This evidence raises trustworthiness concerns 
under these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant accumulated more than $16,000 in delinquent debts that were alleged 
in the SOR. She did not show that these debts arose from conditions beyond her control 
or that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. She documented no counseling 
to assist with debt resolution, nor did she demonstrate an ability to avoid recurrence of 
financial problems. According to the record evidence, the SOR-alleged debts remain 
unresolved and no documented basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of them was 
provided. Applicant therefore failed to establish mitigation of trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The trustworthiness concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 
15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the [trustworthiness] clearance process or any 
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is established by the evidence in 
this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her 1997 charge, and 1999 felony 
conviction, for Breach of Trust with Fraudulent Intent, Value Greater than $5,000 that 
resulted from her theft of about $15,000 from a former employer. Trustworthiness 
concerns under AG ¶ 16(a) were established. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them were established in this case. Applicant did not make 
prompt or good-faith efforts to correct her falsification or concealment. She waited until 
she was confronted with court documentation while being interviewed by an OPM 
investigator to admit to these facts. She provided no evidence that indicates she was ill-
advised in completing her e-QIP. Falsifying material information is a serious offense and 
Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. 
Further, she failed to take responsibility for her actions, claiming in her SOR response 
that she simply misunderstood the question. She has not provided sufficient evidence to 
meet her burden of proof concerning her personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who is 
accountable for the decisions and choices that led to her financial difficulties. She failed 
to demonstrate good judgment or permanent behavioral change. Her ongoing 
delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or duress, and 
make continuation of financial problems likely. Her fraudulent theft of funds from a 
 
8 
 
 
former employer led to a felony conviction that she intentionally attempted to conceal in 
connection with her application for a public trust position. 
    
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability to occupy a public trust position. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from her ongoing financial irresponsibility and her dishonest personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
