                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-07444
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ronald P. Ackerman, Attorney At Law 
November 29, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated November 11, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On May 18, 2016, the Department
of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
“Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 8, 2016, and requested a hearing
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals.  On
August 8, 2016, the case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge for
processing.  A notice of hearing was issued on August 31, 2016, scheduling the hearing
for October 19, 2016.  The Government offered four exhibits, referred to as Government
Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection.  Applicant presented three 
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, which were also admitted
without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf.  The transcript of the hearing
(Tr.) was received on October 27, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 53 years old and married with two adult children.  He has a Master’s
degree in Business Administration.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a
Mission Assurance Engineer.  He is applying for a security clearance in connection with
his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant denied allegations 1.a., and 1.b., set forth under this guideline. He
admitted allegation 1.c.  (See Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant has worked
for the defense industry for the past 31 years.  He began working for his current
employer in 2001.  He has held a security clearance since 1997, and has never incurred
a security violation.  
Applicant has a history of marijuana use from June 2009 to the present.  He
began using marijuana a few nights a week that increased over time to three or four
nights a week, and then daily.  Applicant used marijuana over the years to help him with
his chronic depression and anxiety.  He testified that he self-medicated himself with his
wife’s marijuana.  His wife was given a medical marijuana card for her migraine
headaches and menopause problems, which expired on April 14, 2013.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit A.)  Applicant states that he has never used marijuana at work, and does not
believe that his marijuana use has had any impact on his work performance or his ability
to properly safeguard classified information.   
In January 2008, Applicant was granted a DoD security clearance.  He continued
using marijuana after having been granted the clearance.  He knew at the time he was
using marijuana that it was against his company’s rules and regulations, against DoD
national security policy, and against Federal law.  
Applicant completed a security clearance application dated November 11, 2013,
where in he  admitted that he not only used marijuana, but also that he intended to
continue using marijuana in the future.  Despite his counsel’s argument that he made a
mistake on the application when he answered the question, Applicant was candid and
truthful at the hearing, and stated that he did not make a mistake, and in fact intended to
continue using marijuana at that time.  He actually used marijuana until February or
March 2014.  He has not used marijuana since then.        
Applicant explained that since 1995, he has sought out treatment for his
depression and anxiety.  In 2009, when nothing else seemed to work, he began using
marijuana.  In 2012, he became so depressed that he voluntarily checked himself into a
hospital.  There he received Electro-Consulsive Therapy for his depression, which he
2
found to be very helpful.  He started eating better and exercising and by 2014, he felt
that he did not have to use marijuana anymore.  He is currently not on any prescription
medication.  He states that he now feels better than he ever has in years.  (Tr.p. 26.) 
He states that he has no intentions of using marijuana in the future.  He futher states
that if he has any future problems, he will pursue treatment through medical doctors and 
psychiatrists, ECT treatments and the like.  
Applicant acknowledges his errors in judgment by using marijuana.  A letter from
his supervisor indicates that he knows that Applicant used marijuana for a period while
employed with the company.  He still believes the Applicant to be honest, hardworking,
trustworthy and conscientious.  A letter from the Applicant’s wife confirms that Applicant
used her medical marijuana for his depression, and last used it in 2014.  She also
believes he is honest, trustworthy and reliable.  Both of them recommend that Applicant 
be  granted a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibits B and C.)       
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse; 
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
25.(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
3
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18 - 19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
4
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in illegal drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant. 
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of
the SOR.  
Applicant’s use of marijuana started in 2009, while holding a DoD security
clearance, for the purposes of treating his chronic depression and anxiety.  He
continued to use it, and over time he increased its use to almost daily.  Applicant knew
that it was against his company’s rules and regulations, against DoD national security
policy, and against Federal law to use marijuana.  Why he did not initially seek out
professional medical help is most troubling.  Applicant is not a young man.  He is an
experience employee in the defense industry, highly educated, and clearly understands
the responsibilities associated with possessing a security clearance.  
Applicant contends that he has now sought out professional medical treatment,
and no longer needs to use marijuana to treat his condition.  He claims that he has not
used marijuana since April 2014, and has no intentions of any future use.  At this point,
he has only been drug free for about 32 months.  His extensive six year history of
marijuana use, from 2009 to 2014, has not yet mitigated   This past conduct clearly
demonstrates a lapse in sound judgment and raises serious questions about his
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug
abuse; 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 25.(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 25.(h) expressed intent to
5
continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue
drug use  apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.       
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Applicant has only been drug free for the
past 32 months or so.  The decision to stop using marijuana is recent.  At this time, he
has not earned the privilege of holding a security clearance.  Considering the extensive
nature of his daily marijuana use, more time without drug use is required in order to
demonstrate the level of maturity, character, judgment and responsibility expected of
an employee who works for the defense industry and has access to classified
information.  Applicant’s past illegal conduct is still too extensive, too serious, too
recent, and a clear indicator of poor judgment and unreliability that preclude him from
security clearance eligibility at this time.
  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must be determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest.  Based upon the conduct outlined here, this
Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does not meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.       
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    
6
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
7
