 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02723 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the alleged financial 
trustworthiness concerns. Based upon a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits 
eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 26, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 18, 2015 (Answer), and requested 
that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 2.) On February 16, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant on February 18, 2016, and received by 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
her on February 29, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
of receipt of the FORM. She did not submit any additional information or file objections 
to the Government’s evidence. Hence, Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
September 9, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all 19 allegations contained in the SOR. Her admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact herein.   
  
Applicant is 32 years old, single, and has a young child. She earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 2004. She was unemployed during 2002, and from 2003 to 2005. From 2005 
to the 2013 she worked part-time for a retail store. In 2013 she obtained her current 
position. From 2003 to 2005 she was unemployed.  (Items 3, 4.) 
 
Applicant stated that her debts arose between 2009 and 2010 “due to life 
changing events.” (Answer.) She did not elaborate about those events. She stated that 
she has not had enough money to pay her debts. (Answer.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from December 2012 and February 2015, 
the SOR alleged 19 delinquent debts totaling $42,200, which accumulated between 
2009 and 2012. (Items 5 and 6.) They included delinquent credit cards, an automobile 
loan, an unpaid apartment lease, and student loans. 
 
Applicant provided proof that she paid two debts: SOR ¶¶ 1.q for $456 and 1.o 
for $176. (Answer.) Applicant stated that she consolidated all of her student loans and 
that she was going to begin making payments in March 2016. Those loans are: SOR ¶¶ 
1.a for $15,335; 1.e for $1,178; 1.j for $3,015; 1.l for $885; 1.m for $702; and 1.n for 
$309. (Answer.) She did not submit proof of that consolidation or that she made any 
payment. She said that three other debts would be paid in full by December 2015, but 
submitted no proof.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to 
protecting such information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2009 and extend into the present. She 
has numerous unresolved delinquent debts. The evidence raises the above 
trustworthiness concerns, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
                                            
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing. She did not provide sufficient 
information that they arose under unusual conditions or circumstances beyond her 
control. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) or AG ¶ 20(b). 
There is no evidence that she participated in financial or budget counseling, or that her 
financial problems are under control; thus, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant paid 
two debts, which demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve those debts and 
established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). There is no evidence that Applicant 
successfully disputed any debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is responsible for her choices and conduct that underlie the 
trustworthiness concerns set forth in the SOR. She provided no current budget 
information demonstrating an ability to resolve those obligations or a solid plan to avoid 
additional financial duress. At this time, she has not established a track record of 
managing delinquent debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:     
      
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.o:                For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.p:       Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.q:       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.r and 1.s:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
