 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00528 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the People’s Republic of China (China). In 2006, when she 
was 22 years old, she entered the United States and became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 2012. She has frequent contact with her parents, who are citizens and residents of 
China. She visited her parents or they visited her eight times from 2009 to 2016. Her 
parents are aware that she works at a sensitive military installation. Foreign influence 
security concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 20, 2012. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant a clearance. On August 8, 2015, the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B (foreign influence).1 Applicant answered the SOR on October 7, 2015, and 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
April 13, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on May 2, 2016, scheduling a hearing for May 31, 2016.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits (GE 1 and 2). Applicant 
testified, and submitted 14 exhibits (AE) 1 through 14. All exhibits were admitted into the 
record without objections. GE 2 was made part of the record for the limited purpose of 
taking administrative notice, but not admitted as evidence. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 7, 2016. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
the government of China. (GE 2) There were no objections, and I took administrative 
notice as requested. Department Counsel’s proposed administrative notice is quoted in 
the section labeled, “China,” infra. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her response, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. She also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
   
Applicant is a 32-year-old financial analyst at a DOD research center, who has 
worked for the same DOD contractor since 2012. She received her bachelor’s degree in 
petroleum engineering in China in 2006. She is enrolled in a master’s degree in 
business administration at a U.S. university. Her current grade point average in her 
master’s program is 4.0. (AE 11) This is her first SCA.  
 
Applicant’s husband immigrated to the United States in 1993, at age 10. In 2002, 
he went to China to stay with his aunt. Applicant was living in the same apartment 
complex as he was and they started dating. He went to China several times for periods 
of up to about two months after coming to the United States. He did not study in China. 
He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1998. He is self-employed in a recreational 
business. Prior to his current employment, his business was involved with vending 
machines.  
 
In 2006, Applicant moved to the United States when she was 22 years old. She 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012. (AE 4) She was not employed in China 
before moving to the United States. Applicant married in the United States in 2006. Her 
two children were born in the United States; and her children are ages three and seven. 
(AE 1, AE 2, AE 3) Applicant and her spouse own two residential properties in the 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
United States. She owns two U.S. retirement accounts, and she has a checking and 
retirement account in the United States. (AE 7-10) She testified that she does not own 
any property or have any financial interests in China. (Tr. 54)  
 
Applicant’s mother, who is 59 years old, and her father, who is 60 years old, are 
citizens and residents of China. Her mother was a government employee involved in 
collecting taxes. Her father was a train conductor (engineer). Her parents are retired. 
They own two condominiums in China. Applicant’s communications with them pertain to 
family matters and not to her work. She communicates with them two to four times a 
month. Her parents are aware that she works at a sensitive military installation in 
finance and accounting. Applicant does not have any siblings. She has not remained in 
contact with her friends from college.  
 
Applicant traveled to China in 2009, 2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016. Her parents 
visited Applicant and her family in the United States in 2009, 2012, and 2013. (Tr. 51-
52) 
 
When Applicant became a U.S. citizen, her Chinese citizenship was revoked 
because China does not permit dual citizenship.2 When Applicant requested a visa to 
visit China at the Chinese Embassy in 2012, they stamped cancel on her passport and 
cut the corner off of it. (AE 4)    
 
A Navy commander is the deputy director of the division where Applicant works. 
He has known Applicant since September 2015, when he arrived in his assignment. He 
described Applicant’s work as “impeccable,” and he believes that she is a great person 
and very reliable. (Tr. 45) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law has a Ph.D. and has worked for the U.S. Army since 
1992. She has held a top secret clearance for seven years. Her husband passed away 
18 months ago after working for the federal government for 34 years. She believes 
Applicant has stronger roots in the United States than in China. Applicant is close to her 
family in the United States. (AE 14) Her loyalty to the United States is unquestionable.  
 
Applicant’s performance appraisal from February 2015 to February 2016 shows 
her excellent work and important contributions to accomplishment of her employer’s 
mission. (AE 12) In April 2015, she received a promotion at work. (AE 13) She 
described herself as honorable, reliable, conscientious, diligent, trustworthy, and loyal to 
the United States and her family. Applicant believes that her life and future are in the 
United States. 
 
China 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning the government of 
China: The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
                                            
2 China does not recognize dual citizenship. See e.g., website Consulate General of the United 
States in Guangzhou, China, http://guangzhou.usembassy-china.org.cn/acivufaq.html. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or email. 
  
In assessing the military and security developments in China, the U.S. 
Department of Defense has reported that: 
 
• Chinese actors are the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and 
economic information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing 
and persistent threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat 
will evolve with continuing technological advances in the global information 
environment. 
 
• China uses its intelligence services and employs other illicit approaches that 
violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security and 
export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials not 
readily obtainable through commercial means or academia. 
 
• China is using its computer network exploitation (CNE) capability to support 
intelligence collection against the U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense 
industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense programs. The 
information targeted could potentially be used to benefit China’s defense 
industry, high technology, policymaker interest in U.S. leadership thinking on 
key China issues, and military planners building a picture of U.S. network 
defense networks, logistics, and related military capabilities that could be 
exploited during a crisis. 
 
• China uses State-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase 
the level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, 
development, and acquisition. 
 
• The organizational network of China’s military-industrial complex is such that 
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access sensitive and dual-use 
technologies or knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research 
and development. 
 
• China has in place a long-term, comprehensive military modernization 
program designed to improve its armed forces’ capacity to fight short-
duration, high-intensity regional conflicts and, as China’s global footprint and 
international interests grow, its military modernization program has become 
progressively more focused on investments for a range of missions beyond 
China’s periphery . . . . 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported: 
 
• Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese government has conducted large-
scale cyber espionage against the United States. China has compromised a 
range of U.S. networks, including those of DoD, defense contractors, and 
private enterprises. China’s material incentives for continuing this activity are 
immense and unlikely to be altered by small-scale U.S. actions. 
 
• China’s progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to 
China’s substantial and sustained investment in defense research and 
development (R&D). China’s large-scale, state-sponsored theft of intellectual 
property and proprietary information also has allowed China to fill knowledge 
gaps in its domestic defense and commercial R&D. 
 
• Since the 1990s, China has promoted civil-military integration to facilitate the 
transfer of commercial technologies for military use. As part of this effort, 
China has encouraged civilian enterprises to participate in military R&D and 
production, sponsored research into dual-use science and technology, and 
developed common military and civilian technical standards. 
 
• With the emergence of a more modern and able domestic defense industrial 
base, China is gradually shifting its focus from purchasing complete foreign 
systems to procuring foreign military and dual-use subsystems and 
components via open sources, trade, and traditional and nontraditional 
espionage. Among China’s most effective methods used to acquire sensitive 
U.S. technology are cyber espionage, witting and unwitting collection by 
Chinese students, scholars, and scientists; joint ventures; and foreign 
cooperation. 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China in 2014, the U.S. 
Department of State reported: 
 
• The Peoples Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in which the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members 
hold almost all top government and security apparatus positions. 
 
• Repression and coercion were routine, particularly against organizations and 
individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy and public interest 
issues, ethnic minorities, and law firms that took on sensitive cases. 
 
• Human rights concerns that were observed during 2014 also included a wide 
variety of human rights violations from extrajudicial killings to various 
violations of due process . . . . 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms (including meeting rooms), offices, cars, taxis, 
telephones, Internet usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, and 
personal possessions in hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched without 
knowledge or consent.  
    
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in China. Applicant’s mother and father 
are citizens and residents of China. She is close to her parents and has either visited 
them or has been visited by them eight times from 2009 to 2016. Applicant has 
frequent3 contact with her parents (she communicates with her parents two to four times 
a month). She does not provide financial support to any relatives living in China. She 
does not have any financial or property interests in China.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection for 
her parents as indicated by her frequent contact with them and their frequent visits from 
2009 to 2016.    
 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s relationships with residents of China create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and her desire to 
help her relatives, who live in China. For example, if intelligence agents or government 
officials in China wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on 
her relatives residing in China. Applicant would then be subject to coercion through her 
relatives and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
An applicant’s possession of close family ties with family living in a foreign 
country are not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion 
or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
collection operations against the United States. The relationship of China with the 
United States, and China’s “history of conducting espionage against the United States 
puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant” to demonstrate that her relationships with 
family members living in China do not pose a security risk. See ISCR Case No. 12-
04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013). Applicant should not be placed into a position 
where she might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist relatives living in China.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from any foreign country seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or her 
relatives living in China. Nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in 
the future. Applicant’s relationships with family members living in China create a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about her desire to assist relatives in China by providing sensitive or 
classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts or relationships with family living in China, and raised the issue of 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established 
and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
her parents, who are citizen-residents of China. She met her parents in either China or 
the United States eight times between 2009 and 2016, and she communicates with her 
parents about two to four times a month.   
 
Applicant’s loyalty and connections to family living in China are positive character 
traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same connections negate the 
possibility of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c), and Applicant failed to fully meet her 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationships with family living in 
China] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant’s relationship 
with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of interest created 
by her relationships with family living in China.  
 
There is no evidence that the Chinese government or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or her family to coerce Applicant 
for classified or sensitive information. However, there would be little reason for U.S. 
competitors or enemies to seek classified information from an applicant before that 
applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.  
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in China. 
Applicant’s family living in China could become potential targets of intelligence agents 
because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s family living in 
China.   
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States and more limited 
connections to China. In 2006, she came to the United States at the age of 22. In 2012, 
Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. She took an oath and swore allegiance to 
the United States. She supports the U.S. Government as an employee of a contractor. 
She has no investments in China. Over the past 10 years, she has been a resident of 
the United States, and through her immigration oath she has manifested her patriotism, 
loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other countries. She has investments in 
the United States; her husband is a naturalized U.S. citizen; and her two children were 
born in the United States. She is working on her master’s degree in the United States.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to her family living in China are significant. She 
also has strong connections to her family in the United States. Notwithstanding, security 
concerns are not analyzed in a piecemeal assessment. Instead, the overall situation 
must be considered. Applicant’s close relationship to her parents, who are vulnerable to 
potential Chinese coercion, outweighs her connections to the United States in the 
security analysis. Her parents are aware that she is employed at a sensitive U.S. 
installation. Moreover, Applicant is personally vulnerable to coercion when she visits 
China, as she does almost annually. Foreign influence security concerns under 
Guideline B are not mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
concept. (AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in 
my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting a grant of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. In 2006, she entered the United States and she married a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. She is working on her master’s degree in the United States. She has no 
investments in China. Her Chinese passport was revoked, and she has lost her Chinese 
citizenship. In 2012, Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. She has successfully 
worked for a government contractor for four years. Her children are U.S. citizens.  
 
A Navy commander described Applicant as reliable, and her work as 
“impeccable.” Her mother-in-law has a Ph.D. said Applicant has stronger roots in the 
United States than in China. Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is unquestionable. 
Her performance appraisal from February 2015 to February 2016 shows her excellent 
work and important contributions to accomplishment of her employer’s mission. In April 
2015, she received a promotion at work. She is honorable, reliable, conscientious, 
diligent, trustworthy, and loyal to the United States and her family. There is no evidence 
of any arrests, illegal drug possession or use, alcohol-related incidents, or delinquent 
debts.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents.4 
The danger of coercion from the Chinese government or intelligence agents is more 
likely than in many other countries. China competes with the United States militarily, 
diplomatically, and through trade. China has a history of espionage targeting U.S. 
military and industrial secrets.       
 
The weight of the evidence supports denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of China. Applicant is close to 
her parents; she visited them or they visited her eight times from 2009 to 2016; and she 
frequently communicates with her parents. “It is not to question Applicant’s patriotism to 
acknowledge that the record in [Applicant’s] case raises the reasonable concern that 
[she] could be placed in a position of having to choose between [her] ties to the U.S. 
and [her] obligations to [her] foreign family members.” ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 5 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2008) (reversing grant of security clearance because of Chinese 
connections). Applicant should not be placed into a position where Chinese government 
or intelligence officials could coerce her parents or Applicant, when she visits China, to 
attempt to obtain classified information. I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
foreign influence security concern. 
 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
