 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
 ) 
  )   
         )  ISCR Case No. 15-01024 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for foreign influence 
under Guideline B and foreign preference under Guideline C. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for her employment 
with a defense contractor. (Item 2) On November 2 and 21, 2014, Applicant was 
interviewed by a security investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). 
(Item 3) After reviewing the results of the interview, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
September 27, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B and foreign preference under 
Guideline C. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2015, admitting all allegations 
under both guidelines with explanation. She elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on February 23, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) 
on February 26, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. She did not 
provide any additional information in response to the FORM. I was assigned the case 
on November 14, 2016.  
 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the PSI to make it clear and accurate, and could 
object to the admission of the PSI as not authenticated by a Government witness. She 
was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the PSI, the Administrative 
Judge could determine that she waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI. 
Applicant did not reply to the FORM, so she did not raise any objection to consideration 
of the PSI. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI 
in my decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. Applicant is 36 years old and has been employed as an engineer by a 
defense contractor since January 2009. Prior to working for the defense contractor, she 
worked for a private company as a qualify engineer from July 2007 until January 2009. 
She was born in Colombia, came to the United States on a student visa in August 2005, 
and became a United States citizen in February 2014. She made three trips of 
approximately 21 days each to Colombia in 2008, 2010, and 2012. She received an 
associate’s degree in 2008 from a community college in the United States, a bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering from a United States university in May 2012, and a 
master’s degree in electrical engineering from the same university in 2014. She married 
a United States citizen in June 2006. She has no children. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated 
September 8, 2014; Item 3, PSI, dated November 3 and 21, 2014)  
 
Applicant admits the two foreign influence allegations in the SOR. She admits 
that her mother, father, and brother are citizens and residents of Colombia. She also 
admitted that she sent approximately $400 monthly to her father for the past five years. 
Applicant has a United States passport issued in June 2014. She also admitted that she 
 
3 
 
 
still possesses a Colombian passport issued in 2008 with an expiration date of 
November 10, 2018. She has not taken any steps to renounce her Colombian 
citizenship.  
 
Applicant’s mother is 75 years old and a stay-at-home mother. She is a citizen 
and resident of Colombia. Applicant has daily phone or electronic contact with her 
mother. She last saw her mother in the summer of 2013. Applicant’s father is 78 years 
old and a citizen and resident of Colombia. He is now retired. Applicant has daily phone 
or electronic contact with her father. She saw him last in the summer of 2013. 
Applicant’s brother is 49 years old and employed as a manager of the collision repair 
shop for a car dealer. Applicant has telephone contact with him two or three times a 
year. She last saw her brother in the summer of 2013. Applicant also has a 36-year-old 
brother who is a dual citizen of Colombia and Canada and resides in Canada. Applicant 
has daily phone or electronic contact with him and last saw him in July 2014. He is 
employed as a logistics analyst for a Canadian company. Her contact and relationship 
with this brother is not alleged as a security concern. (Item 3, PSI, dated November 3, 
2014) 
 
Colombia is one of the oldest democracies in Latin America. It is a constitutional 
multi-party republic. The U.S. and Colombia established diplomatic relations in 1822. 
Colombia held free and fair presidential elections in June 2016. The United States and 
Colombia have signed agreements on trade, environmental protection, asset sharing, 
chemical control, ship-boarding, renewable and clean energy, science and technology, 
and civil aviation. The United States is Colombia’s largest trading partner. 
Approximately 250 U.S. businesses conduct operations in Colombia. Colombia and the 
U.S. belong to the same international organizations, including the United Nations, 
Organization of American States, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World 
Trade Organization.  
 
Colombia has experienced more than half a century of conflict with illegal armed 
groups, including Marxists guerillas and international criminal organizations involved in 
illegal drug trafficking. The U.S. has designated two Colombian groups, The 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), and The National Liberation Army 
(ELN) as Foreign Terrorists Organizations. The Government of Colombia and FARC 
announced they reached a final peace accord on August 24, 2016, after four years of 
negotiations. However, ELN continues to engage in terrorist attacks, extortion, 
kidnapping. The ELN also continues to condemn any U.S. influence in Colombia. 
 
In June 2015, the U. S. State Department issued a warning about the dangers of 
traveling in Colombia as well as the potential for violence by terrorist groups and armed 
criminal gangs involved in narcotics trafficking. No one in Colombia is immune from 
kidnapping on the basis of occupation, nationality, or other factors. Colombia’s National 
Consolidation Plan seeks to re-establish state control and legitimacy in strategically 
important area previously dominated by illegal armed groups through a phased 
approach that combines security, counter-narcotics, and economic and social 
development initiates. U.S. policy supports the Colombian government’s effort to 
 
4 
 
 
strengthen its democratic institutions, promote respect for human rights, the rule of law, 
foster socio-economic development, address immediate humanitarian needs, and end 
the threats to democracy posed by narcotics trafficking and terrorism.  
 
The Colombian government continues to prosecute and punish perpetrators who 
commit abuses, including members of the security services, yet such abuses persist. 
The most serious human rights problems include impunity, an ineffective judiciary, 
extrajudicial and unlawful killings, forced displacement, corruption due to the availability 
of drug trafficking funds, and societal discrimination.  
 
Any person born in Colombia may be considered a Colombian citizen, even if 
never documented as such. Dual U.S. and Colombian citizens are required to present a 
Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
5 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, and brother are citizens and residents of Colombia. 
Applicant has extensive and close contact with her family in Colombia. She has almost 
daily telephone or electronic contact with her mother and father, and phone or electronic 
contact with her brother a few times a year. As a further indication of her close contact 
with her parents, she admits sending approximately $400 monthly to help support her 
father for the last five years after he became ill and could no longer work. Her parents’ 
and brother’s residence and citizenship in Colombia raises the following Foreign 
Influence Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion: and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Appellant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
 
6 
 
 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can 
have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as 
important to their vital interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress.  
 
 The existence of armed Marxist guerillas, the influence of strong organized 
criminal gangs involved in international drug trafficking, and a poor human rights record 
in Colombia places a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion on Applicant.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. There is a rebuttable presumption that 
a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to immediate family members. Applicant 
did not present any information that rebuts this presumption. These facts show a close 
and continuing contact between Applicant and her parents and brother creates a 
security concern. Applicant did not present any information that would negate the 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion 
because of the presence of the family members in Colombia and the existence and 
activities of Marxist guerillas and narcotic terrorists’ activities. Even though her family 
members appear to be just ordinary citizens, the situation in Colombia is such that 
 
7 
 
 
anyone living in Colombia is vulnerable to be exploited, pressured, or induced to provide 
protected information by guerillas and narcotic terrorists. Accordingly, Applicant has not 
met her heavy burden to show that her relationships with her family members in 
Colombia are not a security concern. I conclude Appellant has not mitigated security 
concerns for foreign influence. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual who acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he may be prone to provide information or 
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. (AG ¶ 9) The 
principal goal of the foreign preference assessment is to determine the risk, based on 
foreign associations, that information may be compromised if access to sensitive 
information is granted. It is not a measure of Applicant’s loyalty to the United States. 
 
 Applicant was born in Colombia, came to the United States on a student visa in 
2005, and became a United States citizen in 2014. She has a Colombian passport 
issued in 2008 that does not expire until November 2018. She has not taken any action 
to renounce her Colombian citizenship. These facts raise Foreign Preference 
Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of 
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport.) 
 
I considered Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligation of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
These mitigating conditions do not apply. While Applicant’s dual citizenship with 
Colombia and the United States is based on her birth in Colombia, she has not taken 
any action to renounce her Colombian citizenship once obtaining U.S. citizenship in 
February 2014. Applicant still has possession of her current Colombian passport that 
 
8 
 
 
does not expire for a few more years. Applicant has not mitigated security concerns for 
foreign preference. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The presence of Applicant’s parents and brother in Colombia creates a 
heightened risk of foreign influence leading to the potential for vulnerability, pressure, or 
coercion of Applicant by Colombia guerillas and narcotic criminals against the interest of 
the United States. Applicant’s dual citizenship with Colombia and possession of a 
current Colombian passport shows there may be a preference for Colombia over the 
United States. While access to classified information is not based on a finding of loyalty 
to the United States, Applicant shows a potential divided loyalty to Colombia and the 
United States. These facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated her foreign preference and foreign influence 
concerns relating to Colombia. Because Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from foreign preference and foreign influence, access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
