       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-04340
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 8, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing,
(e-QIP) on October 26, 2012.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On December 2, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD) pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline K for
Applicant. The SOR sets forth the reasons why DoD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on January 27, 2016, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on March 2, 2016.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on March 8, 2016, and he submitted a response to DOHA consisting of eight
2
attachments.  The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge for resolution on
September 13, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 50 years old and never married.  He has a Bachelor’s of Science
degree.  He is employed as a Systems Network Security Analyst by a defense
contractor and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline K - Handling Protected Information. The Government alleges
that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in conduct wherein he
deliberately or negligently failed to comply with rules and regulations for protecting
classified or other sensitive information.
Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
He has been employed at a research laboratory at a University since 1995.  He has
held a security clearance since January 2007.  Between February 2012 and July 2015,
Applicant committed six separate security violations, by violating the requirements of the
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual, (NISPOM), and by failing to
comply with security policy and procedures established by the organization that could
result in the loss or compromise of classified information.  Following each security
violation, Applicant was counseled by his Security Officer or other appropriate company
authorities and provided with written reprimands, expectations, re-training, and security
checklists.  Pursuant to Section 1-302 of the NISPOM, each security violation was
properly reported to the Defense Security Service in an Adverse Information Report.     
On February 7, 2012, Applicant failed to properly secure Room 211, a closed
area of the research laboratory.  He was the last person to leave the area.  This is a
violation of Section 5-306 of the NISPOM, which states admittance to closed areas shall
be controlled by locked entrances and secured by an approved combination lock and
alarm system.
On March 5, 2014, Applicant failed to properly secure a networking room, a
closed area.  He was the last person to leave the area.  This is violation of Section 5-
306 of the NISPOM which states admittance to closed areas shall be controlled by
locked entrances and secured by an approved combination lock and alarm system.
On April 9, 2014, Applicant failed to properly secure, a closed area, He was the
last person to leave.  This is a violation of Section 5-306 of the NISPOM which states
admittance to closed areas shall be controlled by locked entrances and secured by an
approved combination lock and alarm system.   
On November 5, 2014, Applicant failed to properly secure, a closed area.  He
was the last person to leave the area.  This is a violation of Section 5-306 of the
3
NISPOM which states admittance to closed areas shall be controlled by locked
entrances and secured by an approved combination lock and alarm.
On November 12, 2014, Applicant failed to properly secure, a closed area.  He
was the last person to leave the area.  This is a violation of Section 5-306 of the
NISPOM which states admittance to closed areas shall be controlled by locked
entrances and secured by an approved combination lock and alarm.
On July 24, 2015, Applicant failed to properly secure, a closed area.  He was the
last person to leave the area.  This is a violation of Section 5-306 of the NISPOM which
states admittance to closed areas shall be controlled by locked entrances and secured
by an approved combination lock and alarm.
Security investigations were conducted following these incidents.  It was
determined that there was no deliberate intent not to properly secure the locks, and
therefore, no deliberate disregard of security requirements per NISPOM 1-304.  There
was no compromise of classified material suspected.
Applicant explained that his job position includes computer and network support.
This requires him to open and secure closed areas more frequently than other
employees.  Multiple steps are required to properly secure the area.  Applicant stated
that he has recently been responsible for assisting and supporting the needs of his
father, who is in a nursing home, and his mother, who is in an independent living facility.
This includes Saturday and Sunday visits, and to be present for doctor appointments
and emergency rooms hospital visits.  In January 2014, Applicant’s father passed away,
and in January 2015 his mother passed away.  Applicant is the executor of their estates
and the job was time consuming, but is now finished.        
Applicant believes that his parents’ deterioration and ultimate deaths played a
role in his security violations.  The period between his father’s death and his mother’s
death is when the violations increased.  His parents were his only family and he lived
with them his entire life.  He believes that his grief over their loss was the major
influence.  To address this situation, on January 11, 2016, he met with a psychologist,
arranged through his employee assistance program, who referred him for a neurological
evaluation.  The evaluation was scheduled for March 23 2016.  Applicant had also
previously met with his medical physician who suggested the possibility of Attention
Deficit Disorder and a sleeping problem.  In 2013, Applicant had several visits with a
sleep specialist because he was unable to sleep.  His sleeping has improved, but he
believes that it has not fully been addressed.  There is no further evidence in the record
to show that a conclusive diagnosis has been made, or what if anything Applicant is
doing about it.  
A letter of recommendation dated December 31, 2015, from a fellow Network
Security Analyst who works with the Applicant, confirms that Applicant’s personal life
since 2013 has been very difficult. As a single man the effort of juggling his career, his
own personal life, and assisting his elderly parents was laborious, time consuming and
4
distracting.  Applicant is a member of the Classified Computing Group, responsible for
the majority of classified work at the laboratory.  In 2014, he was the sole person
responsible for Classified Computing Networking.  There was a lot of work that had to
be completed by deadlines in November 2014, or jobs would be lost.  This was a
stressful time for all in this department. 
A letter from Applicant’s coworker of sixteen years dated April 6, 2016, indicates
that he has seen a complete and positive change in the Applicant since his parents
died.  Applicant has not had any security violations for eight months straight.  He has
also modified his routine for securing controlled areas by eliminating distractions.  His
coworker believes that Applicant cant be trusted with classified information, and that he
should maintain his security clearance.  (Response to FORM.) 
A memorandum from the Facility Security Officer dated April 4, 2016, confirms
that Applicant has had no security violations since July 24, 2015.  He also notes that
security service personnel have noticed a very significant improvement in his ability to
comply with the company’s security requirement for properly securing closed areas.
(Response to FORM)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors." The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline K (Handling Protected Information)
33. The Concern.  Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations
for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an individual’s
trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such
information, and is a serious security concern.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
35.(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other
sensitive information. 
35.(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by
management.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
5
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct;
h.  The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is "clearly consistent with the
national interest" to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, "The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk. Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines. The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept. Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination." The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record. The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature. Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order
shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
6
CONCLUSIONS 
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week. The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in the mishandling of protected information that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance. If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case. The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in the repeated mishandling of protected information (Guideline
K).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and
untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant. Because of the scope and nature of the
Applicant’s conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility. Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is insufficient to overcome
the Government’s case under Guideline K. 
The evidence shows that on six separate occasions, Applicant failed to properly
secure a closed area, after being the last person to leave the area, in violation of
Section 5-306 of the NISPOM.  There is no acceptable excuse for these violations.
Mere speculation that Applicant may be suffering from a medical condition that has
interrupted his sense of concentration is insufficient to show mitigation here.  Without
sufficient evidence to support this or anything else, these multiple incidents suggest a
pattern of recklessness.  Disqualifying Condition 35.(g) any failure to comply with rules
for the protection of classified or other sensitive information and 35.(h) negligence or lax
security habits that persist despite counseling by management apply.  None of the
mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information.
The number of security violations here raises doubt about Applicant’s
trustworthiness, reliability, judgment, and willingness to properly safeguard classified or
protected information.  These violations were not an aberration, but in fact a pattern of
conduct that may likely recur in the future.          
I have also considered the "whole-person concept" in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
7
whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  Applicant at this time does not meet the eligibility requirements for access
to classified information.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline K
(Handling Protected Information).
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government’s case opposing his request for a security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. l.a.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. l.b.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. l.c.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. l.d.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. l.e.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. l.f.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
8
