 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01734 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
September 11, 2012. On November 23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 15, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
23, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 23, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 5, 
2016.  
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. On June 28, 2016, he sent an e-mail to Department Counsel (AE 
C), noting a Chapter 13 data center website, login and password for Department 
Counsel to access, presumably to obtain updated information on his ongoing Chapter 
13 case. He also noted that he was working with a law firm and “hiring a financial 
advisor to help explain the spending statement.” Department Counsel replied to 
Applicant on July 11, 2016, informing him that he was unable to access the website and 
that he should electronically scan or mail documents he intends to submit post-hearing. 
Applicant did not respond to this e-mail. I also attempted to access his Chapter 13 
account per his instructions, but was unsuccessful. I notified Applicant by e-mail on 
October 15, 2016, of the missed deadline for post-hearing submissions, and offered him 
a final opportunity to submit documents. I did not receive a reply from Applicant or any 
documents to date. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted on state and federal taxes resulting in 
liens, a mortgage in foreclosure, and consumer debts. Also, the SOR alleges Applicant 
is currently in Chapter 13 bankruptcy after a previous filing was dismissed for failure to 
make plan payments. Finally, the SOR alleges Applicant failed to file state and federal 
tax returns for tax years 2008 and 2009. He admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d, 1.h-1.j, and 1.l. 
He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e-1.g, and 1.k. He provided explanations with his answers. 
The Government’s evidence supports the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and is employed in physical security for two defense 
contractors. He was awarded an associate’s degree in management in 2015. He 
honorably served in the United States Army from 1983 to 2004, retiring with the rank of 
Sergeant First Class (E-7). He is currently single, but was previously married and 
divorced twice; 1986 to 1989, and 1996 to 2007. He described his divorces as “messy.” 
His multiple deployments, for periods longer than a year, negatively impacted his last 
marriage and ultimately his finances, including becoming responsible for his entire 
mortgage payment. He has four children, ages 30, 19, 17, and 15, but none reside with 
him. He holds a DOD security clearance.  
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his mortgage and other debts after his divorce in 
2007, resulting in the foreclosure of his home. He also incurred significant tax 
obligations because of his increased work hours, that he failed to pay, resulting in state 
 
3 
 
and federal tax liens. He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007, claiming approximately 
$477,000 in liabilities. In 2009, he decided to stop his monthly payments under the plan 
because he believed his manhood was tarnished by filing bankruptcy, and instead 
attempted to pay off the debts outside the bankruptcy system. As a result, the 
bankruptcy was dismissed for failure to make plan payments. 
 
 He again filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2011, and included his unpaid taxes, 
mortgage deficiency and other debts. Under Schedule D of the bankruptcy petition, 
there are no creditors listed holding secured claims. Under Schedule E, Creditors 
Holding Unsecured Priority Claims, the petition listed $18,518 owed to the Internal 
Revenue Service, and $7,000 owed to a state tax authority. The petition listed debts 
totaling $118,943 under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims. 
His total liabilities were listed as $144,462. 
 
 Applicant testified that he has been paying $1,000 per month since 2011 toward 
his bankruptcy plan,3 and the bankruptcy was scheduled to be discharged by August 
31, 2016. No documentation has been provided showing the approved bankruptcy plan, 
regularity of plan payments or evidence of progress, or final discharge. During a 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) by an Office of Personnel Management investigator, 
Applicant stated that due to a dispute with his ex-spouse over how to list the children, 
he filed his 2008 and 2009 federal and state tax returns late; including them with his 
2010 returns. No evidence has been presented showing the returns were filed, or that 
his tax obligations have been fully satisfied. Applicant intended to include all debts in his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and was not aware why the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k was not included, 
but would check with his attorney. The debt no longer appears on his credit report.4 He 
testified that it may be a duplicate of another collection account. The remaining SOR 
debts were included in his bankruptcy filing. 
 
 Applicant has approximately $8,000 in available cash, but did not provide a post-
hearing personal financial statement as discussed at the hearing. His overall net 
income, expenses, debt payments and monthly net remainder are unclear. He 
presumably completed financial counseling required before filing bankruptcy, and stated 
that he is paying $100 per month for financial assistance from a counselor.5 He did not 
provide evidence of such counseling. 
 
 He testified about his extensive volunteer service to his church, and the support 
he provides to his parents. 
 
 
 
                                                     
3 In Applicant’s Personal Subject Interview (PSI), he stated he has been paying $800 per month toward 
his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. GE 2. 
 
4 AE B. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
4 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.6 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.8 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
                                                     
6 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
7 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
8 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
  (c) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant incurred long-standing delinquent debts and unpaid tax obligations 
since 2007, and has twice filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He also failed to file his 2008 
and 2009 federal and state tax returns when due. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Despite working two full-time jobs, Applicant has struggled with debts, resulting in 
a foreclosure, tax liens, unfiled tax returns and two Chapter 13 bankruptcies. Although 
he was financially overburdened since his 2007 divorce, he withdrew from a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2009 because of his pride, but did not show that he resolved the 
delinquent debts remaining. He also filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2011 and may have 
completed the plan, but did not show evidence of compliance with the plan or a final 
discharge. He has been steadily employed since 2006, yet has not shown satisfactory 
resolution of his debts, resolution of past-due taxes, or submission of unfiled tax returns.  
 
 Despite discussions during the hearing and ample time to provide post-hearing 
evidence, Applicant failed to provide documentary evidence of successful resolution of 
debts through the 2011 bankruptcy. Additionally, he has not shown evidence that he 
filed his 2008 and 2009 tax returns. His financial issues have been long-standing and 
remain recent and ongoing, and there is insufficient evidence of a financial track record 
to show similar issues are unlikely to recur. Financial counseling was presumably 
completed in conjunction with his bankruptcy filings, and he claimed he was receiving 
private financial counseling. Mitigating conditions ¶ 20(c) and (d) are partially applicable, 
but evidence of follow-through action is lacking. Finally, there is no evidence that 
Applicant’s current financial condition is sound, or that financial problems are unlikely to 
recur. 
 
 His overall financial responsibility and willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations remain a concern, and his financial condition casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. The evidence presented fails to show 
that his financial difficulties are fully under control, that he is willing and able to meet his 
financial obligations, or that this condition is unlikely to recur in the future. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy to gain control over his debts and has 
presumably been paying pursuant to the plan, but inexplicably, he failed to follow-
through despite opportunities provided after the hearing. He has not shown sufficient 
evidence of progress toward final discharge of the bankruptcy, or that his financial 
challenges are under control and are unlikely to recur in the future. Overall, the record 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.l:  Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
