 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02947 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2015, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 25, 2016, setting the hearing for 
June 13, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4 which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
 
2 
 
Government’s discovery letter, which contained an exhibit list, was marked as a hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through P, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and has worked for his current government contractor-
employer for approximately two years. He has an associate’s degree and is currently 
pursuing a bachelor’s degree. He is married and has two children. He has no military 
service.1  
 
 In his answer, Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations with explanations. The 
SOR alleged Applicant owed federal income taxes in the amounts of $5,643 for 2012 
and $1,964 for tax year 2011. He also failed to pay his state tax debts for 2014 and 
2015, which resulted in the filing of four state tax liens. The SOR alleged that he failed 
to file his 2013 federal and state tax returns. The SOR also alleged a delinquent 
consumer debt placed in collection status in the amount of $1,226; four delinquent 
medical accounts placed in collection status in the amounts of $240; $137; $72; and 
$1,273. Finally, the SOR alleged he owed $2,784 on a credit card account placed in 
collection status.2  
 
 Applicant explained that his poor financial situation arose in approximately 2008. 
He was then self-employed, but was not earning sufficient funds to meet all his 
obligations. He pursed other employment, but was unsuccessful for a time. Once he 
obtained a job he was laid off shortly thereafter. Also, during this time, his significant 
other lost their child and experienced medical expenses. In 2012, he experienced an 
unforeseen medical situation that incurred more expenses and took him off the job for 
an extended period. Despite these setbacks, Applicant decided against filing for 
bankruptcy protection and worked out payment arrangements for his debts and 
delinquent taxes. The status of the debts and unfiled tax returns is as follows:3  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (consumer debt $1,226): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing this debt was paid in full in January 
2015, before the issuance of the SOR. This debt is resolved.4 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 39-40; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 31; GE 2. 
 
4 AE A, O. 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d, 1.j (medical debts $240; $137; $72; $1,273): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing these debts were paid in full in 2013 
and 2014, before the issuance of the SOR. These debts are resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (credit card debt $2,784): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing this debt was paid in full in November 
2014, before the issuance of the SOR. This debt is resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.g (federal tax debt for 2011 ($1,964) and 2012 ($5,643)): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that he entered into a payment plan 
with the IRS to pay his delinquent taxes. In September 2014 he began making monthly 
payments of $105, which continued until August 2015. He then entered a subsequent 
agreement whereby he makes monthly payments of $180. He has made those 
payments through May 2016. Applicant’s 2015 tax return shows that he is due a refund 
of $4,644, which will be applied to his existing tax debt. These debts are being 
resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h – 1.i (unfiled federal and state tax returns for 2013): 
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence showing that he filed his 2013 federal 
and state tax returns in July 2015, before the SOR was issued. He has filed all his 
federal and state tax returns since 2013, including 2015. This tax filing issue is 
resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k – 1.n (state tax liens $358; $ 1,270; $342; $2,583): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that the liens listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.k – 
1.m were released because the underlying tax debts were paid in December 2014 
(SOR¶¶ 1.k – 1.l) and March 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.m). He is making monthly payments of $70 
on the remaining tax debt. The payments are automatically withdrawn from his bank 
account and began in October 2015. These tax issues are resolved or being resolved.9 
 
                                                          
5 AE B, C, H. 
 
6 AE E. 
 
7 AE F, M, P. 
 
8 AE G. 
 
9 Tr. at 33; AE I, J, N. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant presented a job appraisal from a former position he held, which 
showed he performed at the “fully meets requirements” level. He also presented 
numerous training and educational certificates.10   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
10 AE K, L. 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant owed federal taxes and state taxes for which liens were filed, and he 
was responsible for several other delinquent debts. He also failed to file his 2013 federal 
and state income tax returns. AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (g) apply.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant resolved all of his non-tax debt before the issuance of the SOR. He 
filed both his federal and state tax returns for 2013 and has filed all other required 
returns, including for tax year 2015. He has made monthly payments on his federal tax 
debt since September 2014 and his 2015 federal tax refund of over $4,000 is being 
applied to the debt. He has paid his state tax debts, resulting in the release of three tax 
liens and he is making monthly payments on the fourth tax debt. He is resolving his tax 
debt, made good-faith efforts to resolve his remaining debts, and has filed all his 
required federal and state tax returns. His responsible, good-faith efforts to resolve his 
financial issues are sufficient to no longer cast doubt on his current trustworthiness, 
reliability, and judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s past work performance record and his training and 
educational certificates. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the 
circumstances that led to his tax and debt issues. He took action to file his tax returns, 
pay his tax debt, and pay his other debts. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find himself 
in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
