 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08842 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 29, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 16, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 19, 2016. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
October 27, 2016.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted GE 2, a written request that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that is supported by source 
documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. He denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He received the equivalent of a bachelor’s degree from 
a university in Afghanistan in 2008. He became a naturalized citizen of the United 
States in 2013. He emigrated from Afghanistan through a special immigration program 
for translators. He started the process in 2007 and was granted a visa in 2008 when he 
came to the United States.1 
 
 On April 29, 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). In 
it he disclosed that he worked for his present employer on a previous occasion from 
September 2010 to December 2010. He stated: “During the additional period of activity I 
was at Camp [A] but had to resign prior to deployment due to a family emergency. I was 
there less than 90 days.”2 His job title was linguist.  
 
Since April 2014, Applicant has worked as a linguist for his current employer, a 
government contractor. Applicant was unemployed from July 2013 to April 2014. He 
worked for an Afghan company, owned by a U.S. citizen, as a program manager from 
October 2012 to June 2013 in Afghanistan and left when the contract ended. He was 
employed from October 2011 to October 2012, with a different contractor as a program 
manager in Afghanistan and again left when the contract ended. He was unemployed 
from August 2011 to October 2011. Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he was living 
with his parents in Afghanistan from July 2011 to February 2014.3 He worked part-time 
as a language instructor for a government contractor in the United States from January 
2011 to July 2011. He was unemployed from August 2009 to September 2010. He 
                                                          
1 Tr. 21. 
 
2 GE 1 at page 15. 
 
3 GE 1 at page 11. 
 
3 
 
 
worked in the retail industry from December 2008 to August 2009. He resigned because 
he did not like the job. He was employed part-time for the month of January 2009 as a 
role player for a government contractor. He was unemployed from July 2008 to 
November 2008. Applicant worked as a linguist from January 2004 to July 2008 in 
Afghanistan for a government contractor.4 
 
Applicant’s marriage was arranged by his father, and he wed in October 2012 to 
an Afghan citizen and resident. At the time he completed his SCA, Applicant disclosed 
his wife maintained her residence in Afghanistan. He separated from his wife in 2013, 
and he stated they divorced in June 2015. However, in order for him to receive his 
official divorce certificate, the Afghan judge presiding over the divorce proceedings 
required Applicant’s physical presence. Applicant testified that because he was working 
for a federal contractor in Afghanistan at the time, he was not permitted to leave the 
compound. Applicant gave his brother a power-of-attorney to help him complete the 
official divorce paperwork on his behalf. His brother did so, and the official divorce 
certificate was issued in October 2016. Applicant testified that his last contact with his 
wife was in October 2014. He acknowledged that she is aware that he is an American 
citizen and that he worked for the U.S. government contractor. Applicant has not had 
any contact with his wife’s parents since October 2014. When he was married he had 
annual contact with his in-laws, but he no longer maintains any contact since his 
divorce.5  
 
Applicant does not own real property in the United States or Afghanistan. He 
does not have any banks accounts in Afghanistan. He estimated his U.S. bank account 
has between $70,000 and $80,000. He has no other financial interests in the United 
States.6 
 
Applicant testified that he did not know how many siblings he had. He stated he 
never counted how many siblings he had, which is why he did not know. He admitted 
that at one time he lived with them, but his life and their lives are very different now. In 
his SCA, he disclosed that he had five sisters and two brothers, all of whom are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. He has contact with the brother who helped him with his 
divorce. He lives in the province where Applicant is located. He is married and has a 
child. Applicant talks to him on the phone every month or couple of months. His brother 
works for a local telecommunications company. He previously worked for the Afghan 
ministry of labor. His last contact with this brother was about four months ago on the 
occasion of a special feast that occurs twice a year. In his SCA, Applicant disclosed he 
had monthly telephonic and electronic contact with his brother.7 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 23-26, 43-44; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 18-20, 37-38, 48-49; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. 26-27, 46, 55-55. 
 
7 Tr. 27-28, 32-35, 48; GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he was at his family’s home in October 2014 when he 
went back to deal with marital problems with his wife. He stated he has not had contact 
with any of his sisters since this visit. In his SCA, he disclosed that he lived with his 
parents in Afghanistan from July 2011 to February 2014. He also lists that all of his 
siblings and his stepmother live at the same address. In his answer, Applicant stated 
that he has chosen to not maintain contact with his family and friends, and he has 
substantially minimized his contact with them. He testified he only speaks with his 
parents occasionally. He contacts them on special days, such as holidays. If they have 
medical concerns he will contact them by Skype or call his brother on Skype and talk 
with his parents. He estimated he speaks with his mother every six months. He is 
presently angry with his father and does not speak to him. In his April 2014 SCA, 
Applicant indicated he spoke with his mother, father, and all of his sisters by telephone 
monthly.8 Applicant does not provide financial support to any family member.9 
 
 Applicant testified that his other brother worked on the same base as he did at 
one time. It is unknown where his brother now works. This brother is not an American 
citizen, but has applied for a special immigrant visa, and he is waiting for an interview 
through the U.S. embassy. His brother sometimes needs advice on school or the visa 
process. In his SCA, he indicated he had monthly telephonic and electronic contact with 
his brother. He stated that his family does not know about his job or his location in 
Afghanistan. He stated:  
 
It’s not that I hide . . . from them . . . any risk or anything else. It’s just for 
my safety and for my job I understand and I understand the nature of my 
job that I should keep my distance with people that they’re not supposed 
to know about my job or location.10  
 
When asked why he feels he needs to keep this information from his family, he stated:  
 
Because of the concerns that there are here. Especially my mom it’s 
personal. My mom would not accept that I would come back to 
Afghanistan and work somewhere that my life would be in danger or 
something like that. But like I told you it’s just my job priorities also that I 
want to keep that distance between my family and keep my professional 
life from my social life or personal life separated. 
 
And also the relationship with my mom, like I said, I talk to her 
occasionally. With my dad I don’t – we don’t speak anymore. The last time 
I talked to him was January 2016, which it turned out the whole dispute 
that we have - disagreement that we had was about my marriage. That he 
                                                          
8 Tr. 28, 36-37; GE 1; Answer to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. 35. 
 
10 GE 1; Tr. 29. 
 
 
5 
 
 
arranged that marriage. It was a mistake to me. But it was my father who 
did that.11 
 
Applicant works on a base in the same province where his parents live, but in a 
different district. Applicant’s father has two wives. His second wife is Applicant’s mother. 
Applicant testified that he does not have regular contact with his father’s first wife, but 
did have contact with her in October 2014. He disclosed in his SCA that he had monthly 
contact with her by telephone. In his SCA, he disclosed that she lives at the same 
address as his family.12 
 
 Applicant’s father retired from the Afghan Army in 2004. Applicant was unaware 
of how many years his father served in the Army, but he remembered his father was in 
the Army while he was growing up. His father was twice imprisoned by the Taliban. His 
father was not part of the U.S. supported Afghan Army because he was too old. His 
father is now a teacher and does not receive a military pension.13 
 
Applicant has two friends who are Afghan citizens and residents that work for an 
international agency in Afghanistan. He testified he does not maintain contact with 
them. He limits his contact with non-Americans. He has cousins on both his father’s and 
mother’s side of the family He does not have any contact with them. He testified he 
chose not to have a relationship with these family members.14 
 
Applicant provided two letters of support. One is from a military commander 
(colonel) and another from a senior officer (lieutenant colonel). Both noted that they had 
only known Applicant for the past six months. Both stated that they verified through 
records and third party accounts that Applicant served with the U.S. forces engaged in 
combat operations. They had witnessed Applicant’s steadfast work ethic and devotion 
to duty. They concluded that Applicant is a proud American who takes security 
measures seriously. They recommended he be granted a security clearance.15  
 
Afghanistan16 
 
 The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel in 
Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations 
against U.S. citizens. Travel to all areas remain unsafe due to the ongoing risk of 
kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed 
                                                          
11 Tr. 29-30. 
 
12 Tr. 31-32, 44- 45; GE 1. 
 
13 Tr. 40-42. 
 
14 Tr. 38-39, 48-49. 
 
15 AE A, C.  
 
16 GE 2. 
 
6 
 
 
rivalry between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and indirect fire, 
suicide bombings and insurgent attacks, including attacks using vehicle-borne or other 
improvised explosive devices. Attacks may also target official Afghan and U.S. 
government convoys and compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and 
other public areas.  
 
Extremist groups and members of other armed opposition groups are active 
throughout the country, attacking Afghan and foreign government facilities, with little 
regard for civilian casualties. According to the State Department’s 2015 Country 
Reports on Terrorism, Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated 
attacks by the Taliban and other insurgent and terrorist groups. Border regions between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan remain a safe haven for terrorists.  
 
Afghanistan has significant human rights problems that are widespread. They 
include armed insurgent groups attacks on civilians and killing of persons affiliated with 
the government; torture and abuse of detainees by government forces; widespread 
disregard for the rule of law; and little accountability for those participating in human 
rights abuses; as well as targeted violence and societal discrimination against women 
and girls.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
7 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
8 
 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member 
living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”17 
 
Applicant’s parents, stepmother, five sisters, and two brothers are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. On his 2014 SCA, Applicant disclosed he had regular monthly 
contact with all of these family members. He testified since October 2014, he has less 
contact with his immediate family. He continues to maintain contact with both brothers 
and his mother. He testified that since October 2014, he has limited contact with his 
sisters and he is angry at his father so he has not spoken to him. Despite Applicant’s 
testimony to distance himself from his family, he obviously maintained his relationship 
with his family members evidenced through his disclosures on his SCA. The frequency 
of his contact with his family may have changed after October 2014, but it does not 
negate the relationships. In particular, he acquiesced to his father’s wishes when he 
married through arrangement in 2012. He maintains his relationship with his brothers, 
one who acted as his power-of-attorney so Applicant could get his divorce certificate. 
Applicant testified he has contact with his family on special occasions or if there are 
medical concerns.  
 
Terrorist activity, militant attacks, extremist groups, and members of other armed 
opposition groups are active throughout the country, attacking Afghan and foreign 
government facilities, with little regard for civilian casualties. It has a poor human rights 
record with widespread disregard for the rule of law and little accountability for those 
participating in human rights abuses. Applicant’s relationship with his immediate family 
in Afghanistan creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
9 
 
 
manipulation, pressure or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Applicant’s ex-wife and her parents are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Since his separation and divorce, Applicant does not maintain any contact with them. 
Applicant does not have contact with his extended family and friends. There is no 
heightened risk and no conflict of interests has been raised with regards to any of them. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) do not apply to them. 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant maintained regular contact with his family prior to October 2014. He 
lived in the family home from July 2011 to February 2014. He still has contact with his 
mother every six months, on special occasions, and when there are medical concerns. 
The evidence supports that he maintains regular contact with his brothers. Applicant 
testified he has not spoken with his father because he is angry with him. This does not 
negate his familial relationship. Applicant participated in a marriage arranged by his 
father, which shows a relationship with his father, even if it is fractured at the present. 
He testified that his mother would not understand why he has not contacted her if she 
knew that he is in the same province, which also lends support to the safety concerns 
Applicant has for his family in Afghanistan. Applicant had regular contact with his 
stepmother up to October 2014. Applicant may be attempting to distance himself from 
his family, but I cannot find his contact with them is casual and infrequent and that it is 
unlikely that his familial relationships could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
The foreign influence concerns are increased because of terrorist and extremist 
activities in Afghanistan. There is widespread disregard for the rule of law and human 
rights. I cannot find that it is unlikely that Applicant could be placed in a position of 
 
10 
 
 
having to choose between the interests of his family and the interests of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant became a United States citizen in 2013. He was granted a special 
immigration visa because he worked as a translator for the U.S. government. All of his 
relatives live in Afghanistan. After he became a United States citizen, he went back to 
Afghanistan and lived with his parents from July 2011 to February 2014. The evidence 
is insufficient for me to conclude there is no conflict of interest, either because 
Applicant’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in favor 
of the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 32-naturalized-citizen of the United States. He has significant 
familial ties in Afghanistan. He lived with his entire immediate family in their compound 
in Afghanistan from July 2011 to February 2014. I have considered Applicant’s service 
and loyalty to the United States military forces. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate foreign influence 
guideline security concerns.  
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
