 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03974 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to her, under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
                                                          
1 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated August 26, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated January 14, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on 
February 29, 2016, and she was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after 
receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit materials in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive, as 
well as the Guidelines applicable to her case. Applicant received the FORM on March 8, 
2016. The response was due on April 7, 2016. As of this date, Applicant had not submitted 
any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.)  of the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations. Applicant’s admissions and 
comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been an 
administrative assistant with the company since January 2014. She previously held a 
variety of positions with other commercial entities as a part-time health club tennis 
instructor and office assistant, and as a full-time restaurant dishwasher, hostess, waitress, 
and eventually, shift manager. She was unemployed from October 2012 until December 
2012. A 2007 high school graduate, Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in English in 
2012. She has never served with the U.S. military. She has never held a security 
clearance. Applicant has never been married, although she has been cohabiting since 
March 2014. 
 
Financial Considerations3 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until she moved away from 
home in November 2012 due to “detrimental home life” right after graduation. It should be 
noted that her step-brother is in prison for unspecified charges, and her father is in prison 
for armed robbery. Applicant moved in with an unspecified family member and tried to 
                                                          
2 Item 1 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 14, 2016). 
 
3 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 4, 2014); Item 4 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated November 24, 2015); Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 13, 2014); Item 
2, supra note 1; Item 1, supra note 2. More recent information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually 
identified. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
find employment. Unfortunately for her, Applicant forgot to share her mailing address or 
phone number with any of her creditors, including those dealing with her student loans. 
Applicant conceded that she made poor judgment calls when she acquired a credit card 
when she was 18 years old, and she was “guided” in the wrong direction by a guardian. 
When creditors were unable to contact her, and she failed to maintain her accounts in a 
current status, those account became delinquent. Student loans went into a default 
status. A number of accounts were placed for collection. When she first learned of the 
delinquencies, she was only working part-time, and had insufficient funds to commence 
making payments.   
With added maturity at the age of 24, and improved employment status, Applicant 
eventually reached out to her creditors and established repayment arrangements. As a 
result of her efforts, well before the SOR was issued, she resolved a number of non-SOR 
accounts. Prioritizing her remaining accounts, some are in the process of being resolved, 
and still others are scheduled to be attended to as soon as others are satisfied. Applicant’s 
newer accounts are all current. 
The SOR identified seven purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, as reflected by the September 2014 or the November 2015 credit reports. 
Those debts, totaling approximately $11,472, and their respective current status, 
according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and 
Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described below:  
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.): These are two student loans with unpaid balances of 
$6,031 and $3,940 that fell into a default status and were placed for collection.4 Applicant 
entered into a repayment plan with the creditor one month before the SOR was issued. 
She is making monthly payments of $150 towards the outstanding balances.5 Both loans 
have been rehabilitated, and neither loan has a past-due balance.6 While there are still 
balances on the loans, the accounts have been resolved.  
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a bank credit card account with a $300 credit limit and a past-
due and unpaid balance of $497 that was placed for collection and sold to a debt 
purchaser.7 Although Applicant contended that a repayment plan had been established, 
effective January 15, 2016, and she submitted documentation reflecting payments to the 
same debt purchaser for two accounts, and the resolution of those accounts, neither of 
those accounts was the one alleged in the SOR. She failed to submit documentation to 
                                                          
4 Item 5, supra note 3, at 5-6, 8. The September 2014 credit report appears to list eight student loans, each 
with a different account number, different amount, and different creditor. The creditors are identified as state loans and 
two loans for which claims had been made to the Government as secured guaranteed loans (actually two versions of 
the same two loans identified in the SOR), a particular school loan, and three U.S. Department of Education loans. All 
of her other student loans have been rehabilitated, and they have either been resolved or are in the process of being 
resolved. 
 
5 Item 1 (Payment Activity, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
6 Item 4, supra note 3, at 2-3. 
 
7 Item 5, supra note 3, at 6; Item 4, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
support her contention that this particular account had been placed into a repayment plan. 
The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a medical account with an unpaid balance of $448 that was 
placed for collection.8 Applicant set up a repayment arrangement with the collection agent 
in February 2015 – ten months before the SOR was issued – and authorized automatic 
payments were made, totaling $461.74, with the final payment being made in April 2015.9 
The account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): This is a medical account with an unpaid balance of $384 that was 
placed for collection.10 At the time Applicant answered the SOR, she stated an intention 
to contact the collection agent, the same one handling her other medical account, to set 
up a repayment plan for either one full payment or several payments made over the period 
of a month.11 She did not submit any more recent documentation to reflect her subsequent 
actions. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.g.): These are two unspecified accounts related to an insurance 
lapse with unpaid balances of $124 and $48 that were placed for collection.12 At the time 
Applicant answered the SOR, she stated an intention to contact the collection agent for 
both accounts to set up a repayment plan to pay them off in February 2016.13 She did not 
submit any more recent documentation to reflect her subsequent actions. The accounts 
have not been resolved. 
As noted above, in addition to the SOR-related accounts, Applicant had a number 
of other delinquent accounts to which she directed her attention, well before the SOR was 
issued. All of those accounts have been either resolved or are in the process of being 
resolved. Other than the accounts explored above, her most recent credit report does not 
list any other delinquencies. As Applicant noted in her Answer to the SOR, at the age of 
24, and with improved employment status, she started addressing her debts, and by the 
age of 26, she was almost finished doing so. Applicant failed to submit a personal financial 
statement to reflect her net monthly income; monthly expenses; and if she has a monthly 
remainder available for discretionary saving or spending. The absence of such 
information makes an assessment of her financial situation more difficult. Nevertheless, 
Applicant has made substantial progress in resolving her delinquent accounts, including 
                                                          
8 Item 5, supra note 3, at 10. 
 
9 Item 1 (Letter, dated February 18, 2015), attached the Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; Item 1 (Transaction 
History, various dates), attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
10 Item 5, supra note 3, at 10. 
 
11 Item 1, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
12 Item 5, supra note 3, at 10; Item 4, supra note 3, at 1. 
 
13 Item 1, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
those that were not alleged in the SOR. It appears that Applicant’s financial status has 
improved significantly, and that her financial problems are finally under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”14 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”15   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”16 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.17  
                                                          
14 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
15 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
16 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”18 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”19 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems initially arose in late 2012. Accounts 
became delinquent and student loans went into a default status. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
apply.  
                                                          
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person 
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG 
¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”20  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) all apply. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by her personal frivolous or irresponsible spending, although she 
acknowledged that she made poor judgment calls when she acquired a credit card when 
she was 18 years old and was subsequently guided in the wrong direction by a guardian. 
Also, it does not appear that she spent beyond her means. Instead, her financial problems 
initially occurred when she graduated from college and moved away from a “detrimental 
home life” and failed to share her mailing address or phone number with any of her 
creditors. Unemployment and part-time employment exacerbated her financial difficulties. 
Upon obtaining a permanent job in January 2014 and improving her financial situation, 
she contacted most of her creditors and set up repayment arrangements, well before the 
SOR was issued. Student loans were rehabilitated and either brought current or paid off. 
Other accounts, including credit cards and medical accounts, were also resolved. To the 
extent that there may be any remaining delinquencies, those accounts with relatively 
small balances are of little security significance.  
 
Security clearance adjudications are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The adjudicative 
guidelines do not require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt 
alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems 
and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an 
applicant immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
                                                          
20 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one 
at a time. It appears that Applicant’s financial status has improved significantly, and that 
her financial problems are under control. Applicant acted prudently and responsibly. 
Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances confronting her, no longer cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.21 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.22       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. After she relocated 
her residence, Applicant failed to notify her creditors how to reach her and she failed 
maintain her normal monthly payments with respect to those accounts. A number of 
accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection. Student loans went into a 
default status.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, mishandling protected 
information, substance abuse, or criminal conduct. Applicant graduated from college and 
left the family residence because of her “detrimental home life.” Unemployment and part-
time employment left her without the financial resources to maintain her accounts in a 
current status. However, rather than ignoring her delinquent debts, as she was becoming 
more financially able, she prioritized her accounts and entered into repayment 
                                                          
21 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
22 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
agreements with most of her creditors. She paid off or has resolved some SOR-related 
debts as well as some debts that were not alleged in the SOR. In the absence of other 
delinquencies, there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. Applicant stated that she intended to continue to resolve any remaining 
delinquencies on her priority list.23  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 24 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, limited only by her modest earnings, and she started to do so well 
before the SOR was issued. She is now more financially mature, and she is continuing to 
follow her debt repayment plans consistent with her list of priorities. Overall, the evidence 
leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s security worthiness. For all of 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her 
financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
  
                                                          
23 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute 
for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR 
Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
