KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant argues that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence in the record,
citing to his having held a clearance for years, his reputation, and the reasons for his financial
problems.  The Judge made extensive findings, which included matters favorable to Applicant,
and he discussed this evidence in his analysis.  The Judge’s findings and analysis were consistent
with the record that was before him.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge
considered the entirety of the evidence, nor has he shown that the Judge failed properly to weigh
the evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-02477.a1
DATE: 11/23/2016
DATE: November 23, 2016
In Re:
------------. 
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-02477
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 2, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On August 23, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider record
evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant seeks to retain a clearance that he has held for many years.  He retired from the
military after 20 years of service and has since been employed in the Defense industry.  He has
worked for his current employer since 2009.  He enjoys an outstanding reputation for the quality of
his work, as well as for his honesty, dependability, and responsibility.  
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which he disclosed in an earlier security
clearance application (SCA).  He stated that his credit card debts “snowballed,” exacerbating his
financial difficulties.  Decision at 3.  In addition, he failed to pay around $2,000 in Federal taxes in
2009 and 2010.  His SOR lists failure to file Federal tax returns for those two years; a charged-off
credit card in the amount of nearly $8,000; and two unpaid medical bills of $119 and $25
respectively.  
Applicant was not certain what caused his tax problems, though be believes that they
stemmed from a change of employers in 2009.  His former employer had given him a check for
$18,000, representing the funds from his retirement account.  Applicant misplaced the check and
failed to rollover the proceeds into another account.  He subsequently found the check and deposited
it into a regular bank account.  His tax transcripts show that no tax return was filed in 2009 and that,
in 2013, the IRS prepared a substitute return for him for 2010.  His transcripts also show that he filed
after the due date in 2013 and that he was charged a penalty for late payment of tax in 2014.
Applicant provided no documentation about the $8,000 charged-off credit card account.  He
was asked about this debt during his 2012 clearance investigation.  He has made no recent efforts
to resolve this debt and it remains unresolved.
The Judge’s Analysis
2
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s case raised three disqualifying conditions: 19(a), (c),
and (g).1  He further concluded that Applicant’s tax problems were due to negligence rather than to
some cause outside Applicant’s control.  He also concluded that Applicant’s credit card debt is
ongoing, despite his having had several years in which to address it.  The Judge noted Applicant’s
military service, his lengthy history of holding a clearance without incident or concern; his good
employment record; and his voluntary reporting of his financial problems in his SCA.  He found that
this favorable evidence was not enough to mitigate the concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent
debts and dilatory tax filings.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence in the record, citing to
his having held a clearance for many years, his excellent reputation, and the reasons for his financial
problems.  The Judge made fairly extensive findings, which included matters favorable to Applicant,
and he discussed this favorable evidence in his analysis.  The Judge’s findings and analysis were
consistent with the record that was before him.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the
Judge considered the entirety of the evidence, nor has he shown that the Judge failed properly to
weigh the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05795 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).  
Applicant contends that he does not have a history of financial problems.  We construe this
as an argument that his delinquent debts do not raise security concerns.  The Directive presumes a
nexus between admitted or proved conduct under any Guideline and an applicant’s eligibility of a
clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016).  In the case before us,
debts that have gone unresolved in the years since Applicant’s previous clearance investigation can
reasonably be characterized as a history of failing to pay debts.  We find no error in the Judge’s
application of the disqualifying conditions.  
Applicant cites to a Hearing Office case that he believes supports his effort to retain his
clearance.  We give this case due consideration as persuasive authority.  However, Hearing Office
cases are not binding on other Hearings Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-03747 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015).    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax
returns, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those
granted access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug.
18, 2015).  Failure to file tax returns suggest that an applicant has a problem with complying with
well-established government rules and regulations.  Voluntary compliance with such rules and
regulations is essential for protecting classified information.  ISCR Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App.
Bd. Apr. 27, 2016).  
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” 19(c): “a history of not meeting
financial obligations;” and 19(g): “failure to file annual Federal . . . tax returns as required[.]”  
3
The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
