 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05231 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
October 21, 2014. On February 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 24, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on March 16, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 23, 2016, and submitted 
documentation on March 25 and July 13, 2016, admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, respectively. He did not assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2016. The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 5) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted on nine delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $20,671. He is 46 years old and has been employed as a management 
analyst for a defense contractor since 2014. He has been consistently employed in full-
time positions since 2001. He is unmarried but lives with a disabled cohabitant to whom 
he is a caregiver. 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f, and denied ¶¶ 1.g – 1.i. He 
provided explanations with each of his answers. His actions with respect to the SOR 
allegations and the current status of the debts are noted below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a. Vehicle loan for $5,121 Applicant requested a 
payment plan. Creditor 
suggested equal payments 
over 2 years. 
No documentary evidence 
of payments on plan were 
provided. Not resolved. 
1.b. Furniture loan for 
$5,109 
Creditor refused to offer 
payment plan. Requested 
payment in full. 
No documentary evidence 
of payments or other 
resolution. Not resolved. 
1.c. Vehicle loan for $1,248 Applicant offered payment 
plan. Creditor suggested 
payment over 2 years. 
No documentary evidence 
of payments on plan 
provided. Not resolved. 
1.d. Bank credit card for 
$625 
Contract with creditor 
showed account charged off 
with no active collection. 
No documentary evidence 
of attempts to resolve, 
previous payments, etc. Not 
resolved. 
 
3 
 
1.e. Collection on credit 
card for $3,987 
Contact with collection 
agent showed account 
closed per state statute of 
limitations. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or previous account 
payments. No documentary 
evidence showing collection 
agent status. Not resolved. 
1.f. Collection on credit card 
for $3,709 
Collection agent said 
account sold to collection 
agent in SOR 1.e. May be 
duplicate. 
No evidence of resolution of 
debt or previous account 
payments. No documentary 
evidence showing account 
sold, duplicate, or with new 
collection agent. Not 
resolved. 
1.g. Collection account  
$310 
Negotiated settlement and 
paid. 
Resolved 
1.h. Collection account 
$310 
Negotiated settlement and 
paid. 
Resolved 
1.i. Collection account for 
$252 
Paid Resolved 
 
 Applicant diligently listed his debts in his SCA, and noted they became 
delinquent in or about 2010. However, he stated in his Answer that his financial 
difficulties began in late 2008 to early 2009 when the economy impacted his income. He 
became a caregiver for someone on disability in 2004.  
 
 In late 2010, he worked two jobs3 (one part-time) but missed a total of four weeks 
of work after suffering injuries to his hand and knee, from an auto accident. He was 
treated for a back injury for six months after the accident, but continued to work both 
jobs. Since he had to travel for his full-time job, he was unable to keep the part-time job 
after 2011. As a result, he was unable to make payments on his mortgage and other 
debts. His home was foreclosed and his car was repossessed. He had no savings and 
was struggling to manage his finances. He was forced to leave a rented home and live 
in two rented storage sheds with his cohabitant for three months.  The sheds had no 
running water or electricity. He eventually left the sheds, but unknown to him, he 
remained responsible for another month’s rent. He now believes he is getting “breathing 
room” to pay his debts, but his duties as a caregiver and cost of living have been 
financially challenging. 
 
                                                     
3 The full-time job lasted from September 2010 – June 2013, while the part-time job lasted from 
September 2010 – March 2011. 
 
4 
 
 Of note, Applicant listed cruises and tourist trips to Mexico, Jamaica, and the 
Cayman Islands each year from 2007 – 2012. He has not obtained credit counseling or 
budgeting education. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.4 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.6 
 
                                                     
4 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
6 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred long-standing delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant allowed his debts to remain unresolved for many years before they 
became a security concern. Although he suffered a period of job disruption and 
underemployment in or about 2010 to 2011, he has been steadily employed in full-time 
positions since 2001, and in his current position since 2014. 
 
 In response to the SOR, he took some action toward addressing his debts, and 
paid three debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.g – 1.i. Two debts, SOR ¶¶ 1.e, and 1.f are possibly 
duplicates, have been apparently charged-off and are not collectable, or are otherwise 
closed to collection efforts. These debts are mitigated under AG 20 ¶ (b) and (d). The 
debts under SOR ¶ 1.a – 1.d, remain unpaid with insufficient efforts toward resolution 
provided. No mitigation is appropriate. 
 
 Applicant’s efforts to resolve his debts occurred too late. Two debts had fallen 
into an uncollectable status because of the passage of time or sale of the debt to 
another agent, but do not qualify for mitigation since Applicant ignored them until they 
were uncollectable and has not shown their status through documentary evidence. He 
has not established a financial track record to show similar issues are unlikely to recur. 
His financial issues have been long-standing and remain recent and ongoing. No credit 
counseling or budget education has occurred. For his unresolved debts, Applicant has 
not acted responsibly under the circumstances. His overall financial status remains a 
concern, and his actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. His efforts so far have been inadequate to demonstrate that his financial 
circumstances are under control or that he is willing and able to resolve his remaining 
debts and meet his future financial obligations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Applicant resolved three debts, but has not adequately addressed the large debts 
and waited too long to address those that are no longer collectable. Although he claims 
to have made progress on his overall financial condition, he did not follow through with 
evidence of payments or other resolution where applicable. Additionally, despite 
Applicant’s narrative about his poor financial and living conditions, he was still able to  
vacation on cruises or other trips every year from 2007 to 2012. Overall, the record 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
