 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07857 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 28, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on eight debts, in a total exceeding $21,600. 
He resolved three of his debts, totaling $12,388. Applicant failed to introduce 
documentation to show his remaining five delinquencies have been resolved. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 26, 2015, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On May 16, 2016, the Department of Defense issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 21, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 2, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 16, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 14, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection. (Tr. 12-16.) Applicant testified and offered three 
exhibits (AE), marked AE A through AE C, which were also admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 22, 2016. The record 
was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. Applicant presented two 
additional exhibits, marked AE D and AE E. Department Counsel had no objections to 
AE D and AE E, and they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He has been employed by his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since June 2013. Applicant divorced his ex-wife in 2010. He has two 
minor children with his ex-wife. He remarried in 2012. (Tr. 19-20, 22-23.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on eight debts in a 
total exceeding $21,600. Applicant admitted all of the debts alleged in SOR. His debts 
are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.) 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to a series of events beyond his 
control. He and his wife separated in 2008. A few months after their separation, 
Applicant was laid off from his job. He was unemployed from March 2009 to September 
2009. He received unemployment benefits during that period, but that only covered his 
rent. When he finally found employment in October 2009, it was at a reduced salary. 
(GE 1; Tr. 19-21.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent on a judgment filed against him in 
August 2011, in the amount of $4,455, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.a. Applicant 
testified he did not recall who the original creditor was, but that he has taken no actions 
to resolve this debt. It remains delinquent. (GE 3; GE 5; Tr. 24-26.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a law office on a judgment filed against him in 
September 2013, in the amount of $3,506, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.b. 
Applicant resolved this debt in full, as evidenced by documentation from this creditor. 
(GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; AE A; AE D; Tr. 26-29.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a bank for a delinquent credit card in the amount of 
$6,909, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant resolved this debt in full, as 
evidenced by documentation from this creditor. He testified he by borrowed money from 
his parents to resolve this debt, but that he has repaid them. (GE 3; AE B; Tr. 29.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent on a delinquent medical account in the 
approximate amount of $232, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.d. He testified this debt 
was for the deductible for his December 2013 knee operation. He claimed he paid this 
debt, but had no documentation to support his claim. This debt is not resolved. (GE 3; 
Tr. 29-31.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent on a delinquent credit card debt in the 
amount of $1,973, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.e. Applicant claimed to have a 
payment agreement with this creditor. He provided a letter dated September 20, 2016, 
from a collection agent for the original account holder, which stated the account had 
been satisfied in full. It is resolved. (GE 3; AE E; Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent on a delinquent credit card debt in the 
amount of $4,238, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.f. He has not yet addressed this 
debt. It is unresolved. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent on a delinquent medical account in the 
approximate amount of $125, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.g. Applicant claimed to 
have paid this debt, but he failed to offer documentation to support his claim. It is 
unresolved. (GE 3; Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted debt for a water cooler he purchased five to six years ago in 
the amount of $201, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.h. Applicant claimed to have paid 
this debt, but he failed to offer documentation to support his claim. It is unresolved. (GE 
3; Tr. 35-36.) 
 
 Applicant also admitted to being in debt to both the Federal and state 
governments for 2014 income taxes. He has payment arrangements with both tax 
authorities and is repaying his tax delinquencies, which total approximately $4,500. (Tr. 
40-42.) 
 
 Applicant provided no household budget showing monthly household expenses. 
He did not provide a copy of his earnings statement, although he claimed to earn 
approximately $87,000 per year. (Tr. 37.) I am unable to assess his current financial 
status and his ability or willingness to repay his past-due debts, without more 
information on his debt to income ratio. The record lacks any evidence of credit or 
financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He resolved three debts. 
He has been unable or unwilling to address the five remaining delinquencies. The 
evidence raises security concerns under both of these disqualifying conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Five of Applicants eight delinquent 
accounts remain unresolved. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems 
are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies to his divorce, unemployment, and 
underemployment. These are circumstances beyond his control. However, he failed to 
establish that he has acted reasonably or responsibly since gaining full employment 
with a defense contractor in 2013. He has not demonstrated that he addressed his 
debts in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there are no 
clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
 
7 
 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Five of 
Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. While he was given the opportunity to document 
the current status of his debts, he failed to produce evidence of any actions on his 
remaining delinquent accounts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
