                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-04225
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 4, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 18, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.) 
On February 26, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on April 2, 2016. Applicant submitted an
additional document, which has been identified and entered into evidence without
objection as Item A. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on April 26,
1
2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted additional documents, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 46 years old. He has been married since September 2001 to his
present spouse, and he was previously married to his first spouse from 1991 to 2001.
Applicant has five children. He served in the United States Navy from July 1988 through
June 2009, when he received an Honorable discharge. Applicant has been employed by
a defense contractor since 2010, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection
with his employment in the defense sector. (Item 2.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists five allegations (1.a. through 1.e.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts totaling in excess of $46,000, under Adjudicative Guideline F.
The delinquent debts will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on
the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account to the
Department of Education in the amount of $23,618.  Applicant admitted this debt in his
RSOR, and he wrote that he had signed a payment agreement on December 9, 2015,
and he had made two payments in accordance with the agreement. He further wrote
that he questioned the creditor that if he enrolled in school could his payment for the
loan be deferred until he finished school. Applicant was informed that the loan had to be
rehabilitated before the rest of the debt could be deferred. (Item 1.)
Applicant attached a Rehabilitation Agreement with this creditor showing that he
would make nine monthly payments of $212, beginning on October 30, 2015, with each
payment due on the 15  of each month thereafter. (Item 1.) Department Counsel raisedth
the issue in the FORM that Applicant had not offered any evidence of payments made
pursuant to the agreement. Applicant’s post-FORM document established that he had
only made three payments of $50 on February 12, 2016, February 16, 2016, and March
3, 2016, toward this loan. (Item A.) The evidence does not support Applicant’s
contention that he has now begun the process of resolving this debt according to the
Rehabilitation Agreement.
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for collection account in the amount of
$13,262. Applicant denied this debt in his RSOR, writing that this is not his debt, and he
has disputed this debt with all three credit reporting agencies. He also added in
response to this allegation that he has not applied for any other credit outside of the
education loan, listed as 1.a., above, plus a home loan and a vehicle loan. Finally, he
wrote that his mortgage is current, he does not own any credit cards and his vehicle has
2
been paid in full. (Item 1.) The Credit Reports submitted with the FORM establish that
this debt is owed. (Items 4 and 5.) Applicant had until April 2, 2016, to submit mitigating
evidence, but no independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt
has been resolved. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the
amount $4,959. Applicant denied this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that he has been
in contact with the creditor of this debt, with whom Applicant has an account. He
contended that the creditor acknowledged that this debt was for a credit card that did
not belong to him. Applicant averred that he faxed to the creditor a dispute form on
December 18, 2015, and he was told the creditor would delete this debt from his credit
report. Applicant attached a Consumer Report Dispute Request Form showing that he
disputed this debt for a credit card that did not belong to him. (Item 1.) The Credit
Reports submitted with the FORM establish that this debt is owed. (Items 4 and 5.) No
independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been
resolved. 
1.d. This overdue debt to the same creditor as 1.c., above, is cited in the SOR for
a charged-off account in the amount $4,901. Applicant denied this debt in his RSOR,
and he wrote that just as in 1.c., above, the creditor acknowledged that this debt was for
a credit card that did not belong to him. Applicant also wrote that he faxed to the creditor
a dispute form on December 18, 2015, and he was told the creditor would delete this
debt from his credit report. The Consumer Report Dispute Request Form also showed
that he disputed this debt for a credit card that did not belong to him. (Item 1.) The
Credit Reports submitted with the FORM establish that this debt is owed. (Items 4 and
5.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been
resolved. 
1.e. This overdue debt is also cited in the SOR for a medical/consumer/retail
account in the amount $116. Applicant did not address this debt in his RSOR. (Item 1.)
The Credit Reports submitted with the FORM establish that this debt is owed. (Items 4
and 5.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has
been resolved. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
3
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
4
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions could be argued to apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence
has established that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, which has not
been proven to be satisfied or reduced. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. I do not find that any mitigating condition could be argued to apply as there
has been no significant evidence introduced to establish that Applicant has “initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve [his] debts.” Finally, I do
not find that Applicant has introduced independent evidence to establish that his current
financial situation is stable and secure. Therefore, I find that Applicant has not mitigated
the Financial Consideration concerns, which are found against him.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigating conditions are not applicable, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept. 
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.e.: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
6
