1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 15-01027 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
November 16, 2016 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 11 debts, in the total amount of 
$35,271. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May 2009, but it was dismissed in June 
2009. Applicant remains delinquent on eight of his eleven debts, in the total amount of 
approximately $7,531. Additional security concerns were raised by Applicant’s 
misconduct while serving in the Marine Corps. Applicant failed to mitigate both the 
financial concerns and the personal conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On May 21, 2012, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On February 23, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), and E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 25, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 23, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
June 27, 2016, scheduling the hearing for July 22, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
8. GE 1 through GE 8 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. AE A was admitted without objection from 
Department Counsel. The record was left open for receipt of additional documentation. 
On November 3, 2016, Applicant presented six additional pages of documentation, 
marked as AE B through AE G. Department Counsel had no objections to AE B through 
AE G, and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on August 1, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He has worked as an employee of a government 
contractor since 2012. He served in the Marine Corps from October 2001 to January 
2012 on active duty and active reserves. He achieved the rate of Sergeant, E-5, but was 
later reduced in rank as discussed below. He deployed twice to Iraq. He received an 
honorable discharge. Applicant married his wife in June 2004. However, their divorce is 
pending. Applicant has one minor daughter with his wife. (GE 1; Tr. 30-38, 44.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions and displayed personal conduct that indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. His financial 
problems and personal conduct allegedly raised questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR alleges that 
Applicant is delinquent on 11 debts, in the total amount of $35,271. Applicant admitted 
the debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d, 1.g, and 1.j through 1.l. He 
denied the debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.e, 1.h, and 1.i. He admitted the 
personal conduct alleged in SOR paragraph 2.b, but denied the reprimand identified in 
SOR subparagraph 2.a due to its incorrect date. The alleged debts were listed on credit 
reports dated May 25, 2012; January 6, 2015; February 18, 2016; and May 13, 2016. 
(GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7.) 
 
Applicant attributed his debts to circumstances beyond his control. Shortly after 
Applicant’s daughter was born in 2007, Applicant’s wife was hospitalized with a 
pulmonary embolism. She was out of work for an extended period of time and they fell 
behind on bills due to the loss of her income. Additionally, his on-going divorce 
proceedings have been costly. He testified that he pays two-thirds of his salary in child 
and spousal support, leaving him little left over to satisfy his own bills. (Tr. 23-25.) 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in May 2009, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.a. At that time, they were behind on their mortgage as a result of 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s wife’s medical condition and her inability to work. That bankruptcy filing was 
dismissed in June 2009, and the home was short-sold. (GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 24-26.)  
 
Applicant is indebted to a cable company for a delinquent debt totaling $193, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. It has been delinquent since 2014. Applicant 
presented a receipt from this creditor showing he has a zero balance owed to this 
creditor. This debt is resolved. (GE 5; GE 6; AE B; AE C; Tr. 26-27.)  
 
Applicant is indebted to an apartment home on a delinquent debt totaling $278, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c. It has been delinquent since 2015. Applicant 
indicated he “reached out to [creditor] with no response in an attempt to pay this debt.” It 
is unresolved. (GE 6; AE B; Tr. 27, 47.)  
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account for a delinquent debt totaling $407, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. It has been delinquent since 2015. Applicant 
indicated that he established a payment plan with this creditor. He presented a copy a 
bank statement showing he made a payment to a creditor, but the creditor’s name is not 
legible on that statement. Applicant failed to meet his burden to show he is resolving 
this debt. (GE 6; AE E; Tr. 27, 47.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a medical collection account for a delinquent debt 
totaling $267, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. It has been delinquent since 2012. 
Applicant testified that he was unaware of this medical bill because it was for his 
daughter and the bills go to his soon-to-be ex-wife at her residence. This debt remains 
unresolved. (GE 6; Tr. 27.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account for a delinquent debt totaling $299, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f. It has been delinquent since 2015. Applicant 
admitted this debt. Applicant presented a receipt from this creditor showing he paid 
$299.27 on August 5, 2016. This debt is resolved. (GE 6; AE B; AE C; Tr. 47.)  
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account for a delinquent automobile debt 
totaling $5,227, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g. It was been delinquent since 
2010. This was for a leased vehicle that was repossessed for non-payment. Applicant 
testified that this debt belonged to his wife and that it may be assigned to her in their 
divorce pending proceeding. In his post-hearing submission, he stated “find attached a 
copy of the proposed settlement agreement stating the [$]5,227 will be assumed by my 
ex-wife.” However, no such settlement agreement was attached. This debt is 
unresolved. (GE 6; AE B; Tr. 21, 45-46.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a medical collection account for a delinquent debt 
totaling $233, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.h. It has been delinquent since 2012. 
Applicant testified that he was unaware of this medical bill because it was for his 
daughter and the bills go to his soon-to-be ex-wife at her residence. This debt is 
unresolved. (GE 5; Tr. 28.) 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant was alleged to be indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on a 
delinquent tax lien filed in July 2007 in the amount of $27,248, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.i. Applicant presented a letter that explained the tax lien was mistakenly 
filed against him instead of another individual with the same name. It is resolved. (GE 4; 
AE G; Tr. 19-20, 28, 44.) 
 
Applicant admitted he is indebted on a collection account for a delinquent debt 
totaling $718, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.j. Applicant testified that this debt 
belonged to his wife and that it may be assigned to her in their divorce pending 
proceeding. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 20-21, 28.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account for a delinquent debt totaling $117, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.k.1 It was been delinquent since 2012. Applicant 
testified that he thought this debt was “paid off” but that he will resolve it by the end of 
the year. This debt is unresolved. (GE 4; AE B; Tr. 21, 48.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account for a delinquent debt totaling $284, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.l. It was been delinquent since 2012. Applicant 
presented a document from this creditor and claimed it displayed a ”payment plan to 
pay off this debt.” However, the document is illegible. Applicant did not state whether he 
made any payments under the alleged payment plan. This debt is unresolved. (GE 4; 
AE F; Tr. 48.)  
 
Applicant admitted that he was barred by his military command in 2010 from 
seeing a specific female military member, after being caught engaging in various sexual 
acts with her in and out of the workplace. Applicant directly disobeyed that order in 
February 2011 by meeting with her at her house. However, he asserted the date 
identified in the SOR, of November 15, 2011, was incorrect. He reported the date to be 
February 23, 2011. As a result of that incident, he received Non-Judicial Punishment 
(NJP) for violating Articles 91 (Insubordinate Conduct) and 92 (Failure to Obey an Order 
or Regulation) of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. As a result of the NJP, Applicant 
lost a pay-grade and was placed on restriction for 45 days. He was denied re-
enlistment. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 29-31, 39-43.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
1 The SOR incorrectly listed this debt as a $1,178 delinquency. Department Counsel moved to amend the 
amount of this debt to $117. Applicant had no objection and the motion to amend the SOR was granted. 
(Tr. 21-22.) 
 
5 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant remains delinquent on eight of his eleven debts, in the total amount of 
approximately $7,531. The tax debt identified on the SOR was successfully disputed as 
it was not his. Two other small debts were resolved through payment. These unresolved 
debts range between $117 and $5,277 and are owed to numerous creditors over the 
past six years that he could not, or chose not to, repay. His financial difficulties extend 
back as far as 2009, when he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. These debts and his history 
of financial irresponsibility raise security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
  
  The following Financial Considerations mitigating conditions (MC) under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s SOR-listed delinquent debts are significant and ongoing, without 
indication that the circumstances under which they arose have changed. His long 
 
7 
 
history of financial irresponsibility continues. He therefore failed to establish substantial 
mitigation under MC 20(a).  
 
 Applicant also offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under 
MC 20(b). Applicant demonstrated that his debts arose under circumstances beyond his 
control, including his wife’s health problems, her unemployment, and their costly 
divorce. However he failed to establish that he made attempts to resolve the debts or 
took other responsible action under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant demonstrated no financial counseling, substantial progress toward debt 
resolution, or changes to bring his financial situation under control. He failed to resolve 
even a $117 collection account that has been delinquent since 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.k). He 
did not establish significant mitigation under MC 20(c) or 20(d). MC 20(e) is implicated 
only with regard to Applicant’s tax debt, which did not belong to him and was 
successfully disputed. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
  
 
8 
 
 Applicant’s poor judgment demonstrated by his decision to disregard an order 
from his command, show that he has poor self-control, lacks good judgment, and is 
unwilling to abide by rules and regulations. It also creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. Security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are substantial, 
and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate them.  
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering these potential mitigating conditions, it is apparent that none of 
them were established in this case. Applicant’s NJP for Insubordinate Conduct and 
Failure to Obey an Order or Regulation remain a concern. While he has not committed 
any criminal offenses since 2011, the seriousness of his past crime and the on-going 
nature of his financial difficulties indicate that Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment are still in question. He has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his 
burden of proof concerning his personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate sufficient mitigating information in this 
case and he has failed to meet that burden. While Applicant has not had a criminal 
violation or infraction since 2011 overall, he has not demonstrated that he has acted 
responsibly with respect to his finances or his personal conduct. Applicant’s inability to 
resolve his financial obligations and his record of misconduct continues to raise 
concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to follow rules and regulations 
necessary to protect classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations or the 
Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
