 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00300 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
August 13, 2012. On August 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 23, 2015, and included letters of 
explanation for two allegations. He elected to have the case decided on the written 
                                                     
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on January 29, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections to the proposed evidence, and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 
3, 2016, but did not submit a response or object to the Government’s evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on September 1, 2016. The Government’s exhibits included in 
the FORM (Items 1 to 5) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts, totaling approximately $385,816. The 
allegations include a collections account, a past-due home equity line of credit, and a 
home foreclosure. Applicant denied the SOR allegations and provided explanations for 
his mortgage and line of credit debts. The evidence submitted with the FORM 
substantiates the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and employed as a mechanic by a defense contractor 
since 2006. He currently holds a DOD security clearance. He married in 1979, and 
separated in March 2012 when his spouse filed for divorce.2 He has four adult children.   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant owes $1,419 on a collection account. Applicant was 
notified of the debt during his personal subject interview (PSI) by an Office of Personnel 
Management investigator in October 2012. He indicated then that he would investigate 
the debt. To date, Applicant has not provided information to clarify to status of the debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant owes on a charged-off credit union home equity line 
of credit for $36,774. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a foreclosed mortgage debt for $347,623. 
Applicant claimed in his Answer that after his spouse filed for divorce, he became 
responsible for paying the mortgage and the home equity line of credit, but he was 
unable to afford the payments. He negotiated a short sale of his home, and claimed that 
the mortgage lender and line of credit lender approved, but his spouse did not 
cooperate and the deal was lost. The home was foreclosed3 and he defaulted on the 
home equity line of credit. He also claimed in his Answer that the line of credit lender 
called him to inquire why he was making payments since the account was charged off. 
He did not submit further explanation or documentary support for this contention. 
 
Applicant’s credit bureau report (CBR) from December 2013 (GE 5) shows the 
date of last activity on the mortgage was August 2011, which predated his marital 
separation by seven months. Of note, his CBR of October 2012 also shows a mortgage 
account by another lender or loan-servicing agent as 150 days delinquent as of July 
                                                     
2 The record does not indicate if and when the divorce was finalized. GE 2. 
 
3 GE 5 shows the mortgage foreclosure occurred in about March 2013. 
 
3 
 
2012. The most current CBR shows a zero balance owed on the foreclosed mortgage 
account, and $36,774 balance owed on the charged-off home equity line of credit 
account.4 
 
No additional information was provided to show the status of his divorce, the 
financial obligations that ensued, his efforts to resolve his debts, current financial status, 
or ability to meet future financial obligations. Additionally, there is no evidence of credit 
counseling or budgeting assistance. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.5  In Department of Navy v. Egan,6 the Supreme Court stated that the burden 
of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
                                                     
4 GE 5. 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
7 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.8 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant has long-standing, unresolved delinquent debts. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
                                                     
8 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions are fully applicable. Applicant has been working 
full time with his current employer since 2006. Although his separation and divorce 
proceedings may raise a condition largely beyond his control, he did not provide 
evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He did not provide 
documentary evidence to show what portion of the household income was attributable 
to his spouse before the separation, and the status of his final financial responsibilities 
after the separation. There is no documentary evidence showing what efforts were 
taken to address his debts including payment history, evidence of renegotiation of 
terms, short sale, forgiveness of debt, or other responsible efforts at resolution. 
Additionally, there is no evidence of financial counseling or a showing of his current 
financial condition so that I can evaluate the likelihood of financial responsibility going 
forward.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial obligations 
have been or will be resolved. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable 
to find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his debts. The foreclosure appears to have extinguished any collection 
efforts on the mortgage in his state, since his CBR shows a zero balance. However, the 
totality of the remaining unresolved delinquent debts leaves me with doubts about 
Applicant’s overall financial condition, and his ability or willingness to address his 
 
6 
 
financial responsibilities. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated Applicant’s Answer and my 
findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
    Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
