1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 15-02388 
) 
 Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
November 2, 2016 
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant resolved three of nine debts. She remains indebted on six accounts 
totaling $109,113. She failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the outstanding 
financial trustworthiness concerns. Based upon a thorough review of the pleadings, and 
exhibits eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD 
C3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness 
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive Information Systems 
Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in Department of Defense (DOD) Regulation 5200.2-
R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation). 
On December 5, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 19, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); the Regulation (supra); and the 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2015, (Answer), and requested that 
her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On January 5, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on January 6, 2016, and received by her on January 27, 2016.1 
The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit any information within the time period allotted. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on August 22, 2016. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is alleged to be indebted to nine creditors in the amount of $109,932. 
She admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.i. She denied the 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. Her admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact herein.   
  
Applicant is 56 years old and married. She served in the Navy from December 
1979 to December 1983. She had an honorable discharge. (Item 3.)  
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from February 2015, and December 2012, 
the SOR alleged nine delinquent debts totaling $109,932, which accumulated between 
2008 and 2015. (Items 4, 5.) They are as follows: 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $375, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. In her Answer, she provided a copy of a check written to this creditor for 
$375, dated October 27, 2015. This debt is resolved. (Item 2.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a service provider in the amount of $339, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.b, for unreturned cable equipment. In her Answer, she provided a copy of a 
September 23, 2014 receipt, documenting that Applicant returned the equipment that 
caused this debt. This allegation is resolved. (Item 2.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $105, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. In her Answer, she provided a copy of a check written to this creditor for 
$105, dated October 27, 2015. This debt is resolved. (Item 2.) 
 
Applicant remains indebted on the debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.i, 
totaling $109,113. She explained in her Answer: 
                                            
1 GE 6 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an 
unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management in 
January 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as her own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
My husband and I lost over half of our income when we moved from [State 
1] to [State 2] in 2006. I still am not making the same amount that I was in 
2006. I have trimmed our budget to the essentials and we are trying to live 
a very simple lifestyle. At this point in time I [do not] have extra money in 
the budget to pay on these debts, but they are my husband[’]s and mine. 
(Item 2.) 
 
Applicant provided no household budget showing monthly household expenses. 
She did not provide a copy of her earnings statement. Without this or similar 
information, I am unable to assess her current financial status and her ability or 
willingness to repay her past-due debts. The record lacks any evidence of credit or 
financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified, or sensitive, information in order to raise money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities 
essential to protecting classified information. An individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and 
safeguarding classified, or sensitive, information.2 
 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problem began in 2006 and extends through the present 
time. She resolved three small debts. However, she remains indebted on six accounts 
totaling $109,113. The evidence raises the above trustworthiness concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Six of Applicants delinquent accounts 
remain unresolved. She has not demonstrated that future financial problems are 
unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant explained that her financial delinquencies were due to a loss of income 
related to a move in 2006. Not much is known about the cause of the move and whether 
there were circumstances beyond her control involved. Further, she failed to establish 
that she has acted responsibly since then. She has not demonstrated that she 
addressed her debts in a timely manner. She failed to present a plan to pay these 
debts. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there are no 
clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant 
provided evidence that she disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b because she had returned 
the equipment to the service provider and no longer owed that debt. Mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies solely to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
financial problems remain unresolved. In addition, she is a mature adult and as a former 
military member, should be aware that her personal finances are of concern to the 
Government. While she was given the opportunity to document the status of her debts, 
she failed to produce evidence of any actions on her remaining six delinquent accounts. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concerns. 
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through I.c:      For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d through I.i:      Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
