 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04113 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 29, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on 12 debts, in a total exceeding $56,000. 
Applicant resolved six debts, but failed to introduce documentation to show the 
remaining six delinquencies are being addressed or have been resolved. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 18, 2012, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On December 8, 2015, the Department of 
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
On December 30, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on February 10, 2016. The Government’s 
submission included Government Items (GE) 1 through 5. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on February 24, 2016. She was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s response to the FORM, and any 
objections to GE 1 through GE 5, were due on March 25, 2016. Applicant submitted a 
set of documents, marked collectively as her Reply. Department Counsel had no 
objections to the undated Reply and it was admitted. The case was assigned to me on 
September 13, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 64 years old. She has been employed by her current employer, a 
defense contractor, since September 2012. Applicant is a widow. She has two adult 
children. (GE 3.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 12 debts, in a 
total exceeding $56,000. Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.e and 1.i. She denied 
SOR allegations 1.a through 1.d, 1.f through 1.h, and 1.j through 1.l. Her debts are 
identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 4; GE 5.) After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributes her financial delinquencies to her husband’s 2009 diagnosis 
of terminal cancer. He was no longer able to work and Applicant was forced to leave her 
job to be his caregiver from November 2009 to 2011. It took over a year to get 
supplemental security income (SSI), and they became behind on bills. Her husband 
passed away in April 2011. Additionally, Applicant provides financial support for her 
daughter and four grandchildren. (GE 2; GE 3.) 
  
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a mortgage that was in foreclosure for a 
past due amount of approximately $36,750 on a total loan of $220,892, as stated in 
SOR subparagraph 1.a. The house was purchased prior to her husband’s illness. 
Without his income, they were unable to afford the payments. In Applicant’s Reply, she 
presented a credit report dated March 18, 2016, that showed this account with a zero 
balance. She explained that the bank accepted a “short sell” on the property instead of 
foreclosing on the home. This debt is resolved. (GE 4; GE 5; Reply.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent auto loan that was charged 
off in the amount of $13,418, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.b. This debt was for a 
vehicle that Applicant’s husband purchased prior to becoming ill. The vehicle was 
repossessed. Applicant indicated the dealer retained possession of the vehicle for 
resale, but she failed to produce evidence that the debt was fully resolved, and that 
there was no deficiency due. This debt is unresolved. (GE 2; GE 4; GE 5; Reply.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$1,193, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant produced a letter dated March 
11, 2016, which documented that this debt has been removed by the creditor from 
Applicant’s credit file. It is resolved. (Reply; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $1,037, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.d. Applicant denied this debt 
because she “was not at the doctor or had any medical treatment [in] March of 2015.” 
However, she failed to produce of any formal dispute with regard to this debt, which was 
identified on her March 2015 credit report. It is unresolved. (GE 2; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$1,008, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.e. Applicant produced a letter dated March 
11, 2016, which documented that this debt has been removed by the creditor from 
Applicant’s credit file. It is resolved. (Reply; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$157, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.f. Applicant produced a letter dated March 11, 
2016, which documented that this debt has been removed by the creditor from 
Applicant’s credit file. It is resolved. (Reply; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $58, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.g. Applicant denied this debt, and 
claimed, “I do not owe any medical bills, I pay my copay each time [at] each visit.” 
However, she failed to produce evidence to support her claim. This debt is unresolved. 
(Reply; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a judgment against her in the amount of 
$1,049, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.h. Department Counsel withdrew this 
allegation in the FORM, because Applicant presented sufficient evidence that it was 
resolved in her Answer. (GE 2.) It is resolved.  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$1,018, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.i. This debt was owed to a jeweler. It became 
delinquent in 2010. Applicant admitted this debt and claimed she would set up a 
payment agreement with this creditor. She failed to produce any evidence to show that 
she has made payments on this debt. It is unresolved. (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$326, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.j. Applicant produced a letter from this creditor 
dated March 14, 2016, that stated, “the above account has a $0 balance with an R9 
rating.” Further, a credit report entered into evidence with her Reply also indicated this 
debt had been charged off. This debt is not resolved, despite the zero balance. (Reply; 
GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$438, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.k. Applicant produced a letter from this creditor 
dated March 11, 2016, that shows the debt is satisfied. It is resolved. (Reply; GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$274, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.l. This debt has been delinquent since 2012. 
Applicant denied this debt, but offered no explanation for her denial. She produced no 
documentation to show this debt is resolved. (GE 2; GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence establishing her current income or household 
budget. She offered no evidence of financial counseling, of savings or retirement 
investments, or of other indicators of financial responsibility. The record lacks any 
evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s professional performance, the level of 
responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect to handling sensitive 
information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate her 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. While she has resolved 
allegations 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.k, she remains indebted on subparagraphs 1.b, 
1.d, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.l. She has been unable or unwilling to address these remaining 
delinquencies. The evidence raises security concerns under both of these disqualifying 
conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Six of Applicants 12 delinquent 
accounts remain unresolved. She has not demonstrated that future financial problems 
are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant established that her delinquencies were caused by events that were 
beyond her control including her husband’s illness, his death, and her unemployment. 
However, she failed to establish that she has acted responsibly. She has not 
demonstrated that she addressed her debts in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there are no 
clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) has not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
financial problems remain unresolved. While she was given the opportunity to document 
the status of her debts, she failed to produce evidence of actions on her remaining  
delinquent accounts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
