 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06908 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 17, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 5) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 15, 2015. (Item 
8) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
April 6, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 19, 2016. She admitted 15 of the 18 
allegations of delinquent debts. She noted that SOR 1.e is a duplicate of the delinquent 
debt at SOR 1.d. She denied two allegations (SOR 1.g and 1.i) stating that she had no 
recollection of these two debts. She elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record. (Item 4)1 Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on June 
20, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on July 7, 
2016, and she was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely filed a 
response to the FORM. (Item 12)2 I was assigned the case on November 10, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 8) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
she could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a 
Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that she waived any objection to 
the admissibility of the summary. In her response to the FORM, Applicant did not object 
to consideration of the PSI. Any objection to the information is waived. I will consider 
information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 30-year-old 2004 high school graduate. She attended two years of college 
from August 2004 until May 2006. She was also a government intern from February 
2004 until December 2005. She was employed by a DOD contractor to work as an 
administrative assistant for various government agencies from September 2007 until the 
present. There are no periods of unemployment listed on the e-QIP. Applicant has 
never been married and has two children. She was granted eligibility for access to 
classified information in 2005 by the government agency where she interned. (Item 5, e-
QIP, dated July 17, 2014)  
                                                          
1 It was not clear from Applicant’s response to the FORM that she still wanted her case considered on the 
record. Department Counsel asked for clarification from Applicant. Applicant responded that she did want 
the case considered on the record, and did not want the case converted into a hearing. (Item 13)  
 
2 The items attached to the FORM were incorrectly numbered. Item 11 was not identified on the FORM. I 
have renumbered the documents listed on the FORM as well as all items received from Applicant after 
the FORM was issued. Item 11 is the Court case information listed as Item 12 on the FORM. Item 12 is 
Applicant’s response to the FORM. Item 13 is Applicant’s answer to the question from Department 
Counsel if she still wanted to have her case decided on the record. Item 14 is supplemental information 
received from Applicant on November 14, 2016. 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 6, dated March 9, 2016; Item 7, dated 
August 2, 2014; and Item 9, dated March 4, 2009) confirm the following delinquent 
debts for Applicant; a judgment for $560 entered in 2009 (SOR 1.a); a car repossession 
with a balance of $12,877 (SOR 1.b); a credit card debt charged off for $443 (SOR 1.c); 
a judgment on a loan for $6,834 (SOR 1.d); a charged off account for $4,244 (SOR 1.e); 
a debt for apartment rent for $1,991 (SOR 1.f); three medical debts in collection by the 
same creditor for $610 (SOR 1.g), $150 (SOR 1.h), and $247 (SOR 1.i); a telephone bill 
in collection for $924 (SOR 1.j); a car repossession debt charged off for $6,730 (SOR 
1.k); a telephone bill in collection for $1,094 (SOR 1.l); and six traffic tickets in collection 
by a city for $75 (SOR 1.m,), $300 (SOR 1.n), $300 (SOR 1.o), $65 (SOR 1.p), $250 
(SOR 1.q), and $125 (SOR 1.r). The amount of delinquent debt alleged in the SOR is 
approximately $31,000. Applicant admitted to approximately $26,000 of this debt. 
Similar debts were raised in 2009 when Applicant was last interviewed by a security 
investigator for eligibility for access to classified information. (Item 10)  
 
Applicant’s financial problems started in 2007 and were initially due to her using 
credit cards while she was in school and she did not realize the financial problems she 
was creating for herself. She would use her annual tax refund to pay some of her debts. 
She was living with her mother sharing expenses but her mother loss her job and could 
no longer share the expenses. Applicant became responsible for all of the family bills. 
She is attempting to get on top of her financial problems created when she was 
younger. (Item 4 at 2) 
 
Applicant told the security investigator that she paid a number of her debts. She 
stated she is doing everything possible to resolve and cleanup her financial problems 
that she created for herself in the past. However, she did not present any evidence 
during the interview to verify her claim that she paid some of her delinquent debts. In 
response to the SOR, Applicant presented her latest credit report, dated April 19, 2016, 
to illustrate that her financial situation has improved. (Item 4) In addition, Applicant 
forwarded directly to me her latest credit report, dated November 4, 2016. Department 
Counsel had no objection to consideration of the credit report. This credit report does 
reveal that Applicant paid off two small accounts, and she made some payments on two 
other accounts. Some accounts were listed as closed, but those debts were not paid but 
written off by the creditor. (Item 14) 
 
Applicant listed, in response to financial question 26 on her e-QIP (Item 5), only 
one debt, a delinquent personal loan used for her school expenses in collection for 
approximately $5,000. This debt is probably SOR 1.e. This debt is not resolved.   
 
Applicant noted that she and her mother lived together for a time and shared 
expenses. In approximately 2011, her mother lost her job and the family relied on 
Applicant’s salary alone for income. Applicant decided to forego making payments on 
her car loan and the car was repossessed (SOR 1.b). She had a car earlier 
repossessed when she could not afford the payments after the birth of her first child 
(SOR 1.k). The car repossession debts have not been resolved.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant admits co-signing a loan with her mother. She thought her mother was 
paying the loan with a payment plan. She did not present any information on her efforts 
to ensure that the loan was being repaid by her mother. The debt has not been 
resolved. (SOR 1.d).  
 
Applicant disputes the debt at SOR 1.f for an apartment leasing company 
resulting from the condition of an apartment when she terminated the lease. She states 
that the apartment was not damaged. The leasing agent for the apartment complex 
changed after she left and the new agent has no information on the debt. She provided 
no documents concerning the filing of a dispute or any attempts to resolve the dispute 
with the leasing agent. This debt is not resolved. 
 
Applicant claims that the debt at SOR 1.c has been paid, and the debt at SOR 
1.h was removed from her credit report. The credit report at Item 14 shows that the debt 
at SOR 1.c is closed. However, the credit report states that the debt was not paid but 
written off. She presented no documents to verify that either debt was paid, rather than 
being removed from the credit report for other reasons.  
 
Applicant denies the medical debts at SOR 1.g and 1.i because she does not 
have knowledge of the debts. She has a credit monitoring service watching her credit 
reports and neither debt is reported on her credit reports. She denies the medical debt 
for $150 at SOR 1.h and claims that it has been removed from her credit report. The 
three medical debts are in collection by the same collection agency and the original 
creditor is identified on the credit reports. She did not present any information on her 
attempts to learn about the debts at SOR 1.g and 1.i. The credit report at Item 14 does 
show a $150 medical debt as closed. However, the collection agency is different than 
the collection agency listed in the SOR. Applicant has not presented any information to 
establish that this is the debt that has been paid. She did not present sufficient evidence 
that the three medical debts have been resolved.  
 
Applicant admits the debts at SOR 1.j and 1.l but claims they should not be 
reported on her credit reports since the debts have been resolved. She did not present 
any information to verify her attempts to learn about and resolve the debts. These debts 
have not been resolved.  
 
Applicant admits the debt for unpaid parking fines at SOR 1.m to 1.r. She claims 
that she was not driving when some of the tickets were issued. Applicant did not know 
about some of the tickets because the requests for payment were sent to an old 
address. Applicant did not present any documents to show the efforts she took to learn 
about, pay, or otherwise resolve the tickets.  
 
Applicant contacted a credit counseling company for assistance in paying her 
debts. However, she determined that she did not want to pay the fees to work with the 
credit counselors. (Item 8 at 8) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
 
6 
 
 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or 
her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in 
one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects 
of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial 
obligations. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage 
his or her finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations. Unless there are 
extreme circumstances, failure to pay voluntarily incurred delinquent debts raises 
questions about a person’s judgment and trustworthiness. One who does not pay his or 
her financial obligations in a timely and responsible fashion, may also show lack of 
responsibility in the proper handling of classified information. The person who is 
trustworthy in very small matter is also trustworthy in great matters. And the person who 
is dishonest in very small matters is dishonest in great ones.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts 
as documented in her credit reports, by her admissions to the OPM investigator, and 
her response to the allegations in the SOR. All of Applicant’s SOR debts are listed on 
the credit reports at Items 6, 7, and 9. The information concerning the debts raised in 
the SOR coupled with the debts revealed in the earlier consideration for eligibility for 
access to classified information in 2009 shows a history of not meeting financial 
obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The information 
raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay delinquent debt. Once the 
Government has established delinquent debt, the Applicant has the responsibility to 
refute or mitigate those debts. 
 
 SOR allegations 1.d and 1.e allege that the same debt is delinquent. Since the 
debts are duplicates. I find for Applicant as to SOR 1.e.  
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis for the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s debts are 
numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence 
unlikely. Applicant has been steadily employed since 2008, so she had income to 
enable her to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
 The debts were not incurred by conditions beyond Applicant’s control. Applicant 
voluntarily used credit cards to make purchases. While her mother’s job loss is beyond 
Applicant’s control, it was only a limited reason for accruing delinquent debt. Almost all 
of the debt was incurred by voluntarily use of credit cards. In addition, Applicant has not 
shown that she acted reasonably and responsibly to resolve her financial problems. She 
noted that some debts were paid or being paid but she has not provided adequate 
information to show the basis for her assertions of payment or actions taken to try to 
resolve the debts. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶20(c) does not apply. Applicant did not present any 
evidence that she received financial counseling. She claims to have spoken to a credit 
counseling firm, but she decided not to employ them because she did not want to spend 
the money for them to advise her. 
 
 Mitigating condition ¶20(d) does not apply. Applicant has not established a good-
faith effort to pay her financial obligations. For a good-faith effort, there must be an 
ability to pay financial obligations, the desire to pay them, and evidence of a good-faith 
effort to pay or resolve the obligations. Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A 
systematic method of handling financial obligations is needed. Applicant must establish 
a meaningful track record of payment of financial obligations. A meaningful track record 
of payment can be established by evidence of actual payments or reduction of 
obligation through payment of debts. A promise to pay financial obligations is not a 
substitute for a track record of meeting obligations in a timely manner and acting in a 
financially responsible manner. Applicant must establish that she has a reasonable plan 
to resolve financial problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
 
8 
 
 
While she claims to have made payments on her debts, she did not present evidence to 
verify and establish the payments. Applicant’s credit report of April 19, 2016 (Item 4) 
does not show that her debts have been resolved by a meaningful track record of 
payment of the debts. Applicant’s credit report of November 4, 2016, does show that 
Applicant may have made payments on some of her bills. However, the payments 
would not rise to the level of a meaningful track record of debt payment. (Item 14) 
 
 Applicant did not present any information on any disputes she filed concerning 
any of the debts. AG ¶20(e) does not apply 
  
 The evidence does not support responsible management of her finances. 
Applicant did not present any evidence to establish a meaningful track record of 
payments of her financial obligations. Her financial problems are not under control. She 
has not established that she contacted the creditors to resolve the debts. Based on 
Applicant’s failure to verify the debts and make payment arrangements, it is clear that 
she has not been reasonable and responsible in regard to her finances. Her lack of 
reasonable and responsible action towards her finances is a strong indication that she 
may not protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant did not present sufficient 
information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Even though Applicant has been 
gainfully employed at a good-paying job since 2008, she did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to establish that she has taken reasonable and 
responsible action to resolve her financial problems. Applicant did not demonstrate 
appropriate management of her finances and a consistent record of action to resolve 
 
9 
 
 
financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She has not 
established her suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.r:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
