 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05841 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 14, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 15, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 15, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for July 21, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. She did not submit any additional documents. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since February 2015. She is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. She has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 2000 and a master’s 
degree that was awarded in 2005. She married in 2002 and divorced in 2006. She 
married her current husband in 2008. She has three children, ages seven, five, and 
two.1 
 
Applicant bought a house in 2005 to be used as her home. It was financed with 
first and second mortgage loans. She bought an investment condominium in a tourist 
area the same year for about $293,000. She paid about $10,000 toward the sale and 
the remainder was financed with first and second mortgage loans from the same bank.2  
 
The real estate market collapse affected both properties. Applicant moved with 
her husband to another state for his job in 2010. She was unable to sell her home for 
what was owed on the mortgage loans. The holders of the mortgage loans agreed to a 
short sale of the property and released Applicant from liability for any deficiency owed 
on the loans after the property was sold.3 
 
Applicant was able to consistently rent her investment condominium until the 
collapse. The rental market was flooded with foreclosed properties. Applicant was 
unable to rent the property, and she could not afford the mortgage payments without the 
rental income. She stopped paying the mortgage loans in about 2010.4  
 
The bank that held the mortgage loans sold the second mortgage loan to another 
financial institution. Both the original bank and the second financial institution agreed to 
a short sale of the condominium for $30,000 in 2011. The original bank released 
Applicant from liability for the deficiency owed on the first mortgage loan after the 
property was sold. The second financial institution accepted $3,000 from the sale to 
release the lien, but did not release Applicant from liability for the deficiency owed on 
the second mortgage loan. Applicant’s attorney advised her not to pay the deficiency 
and wait until it was barred from collection by the statute of limitations. She believes the 
financial institution bought the second mortgage loan for less than it received in the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-26; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-21, 26, 29-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
4 Tr. at 25, 28-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
short sale. The financial institution charged off the $24,166 balance of the loan and took 
no steps to enforce the deficiency. It is now past the statute of limitations.5 
 
Applicant’s finances are otherwise sound. She successfully disputed owing the 
only other debt alleged in the SOR. She stated that she has learned a valuable lesson 
and that she does not intend to invest in real estate again.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 20-24, 31-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 17, 19, 23, 45-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay the mortgage loans on her investment property. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s investment property lost most of its value in the real estate collapse. 
She was unable to rent it because of the glut of properties available. She retained an 
attorney who negotiated a short sale of the property. The holder of the first mortgage 
released Applicant from liability for the deficiency owed on the loan after the property 
was sold. The holder of the second mortgage loan accepted $3,000 to release the lien 
on the property, but it did not release Applicant from liability for the deficiency. She 
followed her attorney’s advice and waited until the loan was barred from collection by 
the statute of limitations. The financial institution charged off the loan and took no steps 
to enforce the deficiency before it was barred from collection. 
 
Applicant’s finances are otherwise sound. She has learned a valuable lesson, 
and she does not intend to invest in real estate again. Her financial decisions no longer 
reflect questionable reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the 
successfully disputed debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
  
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
