 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-02619  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean M. Bigley, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has resolved all 11 alleged delinquent debts. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 4, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On October 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 5, 2015 (AR), and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  
(Item 2.) On February 18, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on February 19, 2016, and received by him on March 12, 
2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the 
FORM. In response to the FORM, he timely submitted additional exhibits (Response). 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) are marked as AE A through AE N. DOHA assigned the case 
to me on September 9, 2016. 
 
 In his Response, Applicant objected to Government’s Item 4, which is a Report of 
Investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of Applicant. The seven-page 
document is a summary of an interview of Applicant conducted on January 2, 2013. An 
ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is authenticated by a witness. 
Item 4 is not authenticated.1 Accordingly, it is not admissible and is not considered in 
this Decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of the SOR. (Item 2.) 
His admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and unmarried. He graduated from high school in 1999. 
He has worked for a federal contractor since April 2008 and his current employer since 
November 2014. He is stationed in the Middle East. He has held security clearances in 
the past. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant disclosed debts in his October 2012 SCA, and noted that some were 
based on financial negligence. (Item 3.) In his AR Applicant reiterated that some debts 
were the result of the mismanagement of his financial portfolio and adolescent financial 
mistakes. (Item 2.) In February 2014 Applicant enrolled in a credit restoration program 
to improve his credit standing. (AE H.) 
 
 Based on credit reports (CRs) from 2010, 2012, 2015, and 2016, the SOR 
alleged 11 debts, which started to become delinquent between 2007 and 2012. They 
totaled about $24,000. (Items 5, 6, 7, and 8.) Ten of the eleven debts are paid; and one 
is being paid through monthly payments. The resolutions are noted below: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a was a $3,015 judgment filed in 2008. It was paid in January 2012. (AE 
C.) 
   
  SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d are duplicates of the above judgment. (AE C.) 
                                                 
1 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal 
Board restated existing case law that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible).  
 
  
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e was a $1,874 credit card debt that was settled and paid in February 
2013. (AE D.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f was a $4,200 personal loan that was charged off and paid in full in 
March 2016. (AE E.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j were debts for unpaid parking tickets issued to 
Applicant after a relative used his car. They totaled $1,314 and were paid in 2014. (AE 
F.) 
 
  SOR ¶ 1.k was a personal loan for $12,007 that Applicant obtained in 2007 to 
pay living expenses. Applicant has been making monthly payments of $250 toward it 
since October 2012. The balance is about $6,000. (AE G.) It is being resolved. 
 
 Applicant submitted his budget. His net monthly income is $11,000 and expenses 
are $2,500, leaving about $8,500 remaining. (AE I.) According to a 2016 CR, he has not 
accrued additional delinquent debts. (Item 8.)  
 
 Applicant received a significant promotion and pay increase from his employer in 
April 2015. (AE A.) He submitted character letters from a friend and two co-workers. All 
three attest to Applicant’s trustworthiness, honesty and reliability. They recommend him 
for a security clearance. (AE B.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. From 2007 to 2012, he accumulated 
11 delinquent accounts totaling over $24,000. That history and an inability or 
unwillingness to pay lawful debts, raise security concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) and AG ¶ 
20(b). Applicant acknowledged that some of his problems arose as a consequence of 
making poor financial decisions when he was younger. Those were circumstances 
within his control. Applicant established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). He submitted 
evidence of financial counseling and a solid budget. A recent CR indicates that his 
financial problems are under control. Applicant demonstrated a good-faith effort to 
resolve debts and establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). He submitted evidence that he 
paid a judgment in 2012, a debt in 2013, several debts in 2014, and a debt in 2016. He 
has made regular payments on another debt since 2012. All alleged debts are resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who received a significant pay increase and promotion in April 2015 from his employer, 
demonstrating successful employment. Beginning in 2012 he started resolving 
delinquent debts. He presented evidence that 10 of the 11 SOR alleged debts are paid, 
and that he is paying the remaining debt through monthly payments and has sufficient 
money in his budget to resolve it. At this time the potential for pressure, coercion, and 
duress from Applicant’s financial situation is diminished. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:       For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
