 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-02835 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. He 
failed to show that he has taken sufficient steps to address his past-due debts and 
mitigate security concerns raised by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 On January 5, 2016, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a decision based on the administrative (written) record.  
 
 On February 10, 2016, Department Counsel prepared the Government’s written 
case, a file of relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains 
the pleadings, Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA), credit reports, a 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
bankruptcy court dismissal order, and the summary of Applicant’s security clearance 
background interview. This documentary evidence was identified by the Government as 
Exhibits 1 – 6 and, without objection, are admitted into the administrative record.  
 
 On February 17, 2016, Applicant received the FORM. He was advised that he 
could submit matters in response to the FORM and in support of his case within 30 days 
of his receipt of the FORM. He did not submit a response or any other matters and, on 
September 9, 2016, the case was forwarded to the hearing office for assignment to an 
administrative judge. On November 1, 2016, I received the case assignment, with 
Applicant’s request for a decision on the written record.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his late thirties. He is married with three children. He earned his 
GED in 2000 or 2001. He has been with his current employer, a defense contractor, 
since 2014.  
 
 In September 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) 
in connection with his current job. He disclosed three delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $4,500. He noted that he was considering debt consolidation or 
bankruptcy to resolve the delinquent debts.  
  
 The subsequent background investigation uncovered that Applicant’s delinquent 
debts were far greater than he listed on the SCA. The SOR lists 14 debts. Applicant 
admits 11 of the debts totaling over $65,000. The remaining three debts are 
substantiated by the credit reports admitted in evidence. Applicant presented no 
evidence that he paid, settled, or otherwise resolved (or was in the process of resolving) 
any of the 11 SOR debts. He presented no information regarding whether he sought or 
received financial counseling, or how he plans to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began around 2007, when he decided to switch 
careers and become a real estate agent. Shortly thereafter, the housing market 
collapsed. About two years later, Applicant’s wife lost her job. Applicant stopped paying 
on some of his credit cards in 2009. He was unemployed from March through June 
2013. Applicant listed three of his delinquent credit card accounts on his 2014 SCA, and 
those debts remain unresolved.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted in the loss of two investment properties. In 
April 2013, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy to stop his lender from foreclosing 
on one of the properties. After the lender agreed to a short sale, Applicant decided not 
to follow through with the bankruptcy and the bankruptcy case was dismissed. The 
other investment property was also disposed of through a short sale. He claims that any 
delinquent mortgage loans associated with those properties were resolved through 
agreed-upon short sales.  
                                                          
2 Applicant’s acknowledgment of receipt of the FORM and administrative documents reflecting that he 
was still being sponsored for a clearance were marked Appellate Exhibits I and II, respectively. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The record evidence reflects that Applicant has a history of not meeting his 
financial obligations and, at a minimum, is unable to pay his debts. This record evidence 
raises the financial considerations security concern and establishes the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 Applicant bears the burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by the 
evidence. The financial considerations guideline lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation appears to be rooted (with the benefit of 
hindsight) in his ill-timed decision to enter the real estate business. His poor financial 
situation was exacerbated by his wife’s loss of employment in 2009 and a short period 
of unemployment in 2013. However, he has been gainfully employed since April 2014. 
He has been aware that his financial situation raises a security concern for at least a 
year, but failed to provide any evidence of what steps, if any, he has taken to address 
the substantial amount of past-due debt that he accumulated over the past seven years. 
He also did not provide any evidence indicating the receipt of financial counseling or 
from which a favorable inference could be drawn regarding his current financial 
situation. Accordingly, based on the administrative record, I find that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, 
to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of 
showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access 
to this nation’s secrets.3 Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F. I gave 
due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, including the 
circumstances outside of Applicant’s control that negatively impacted his finances and 
the candor he exhibited during the course of the security clearance process. However, 
after weighing the favorable and unfavorable information, Applicant’s financial situation 
continues to raise a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about his present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:         Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
