 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-01199 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling 
$79,764. His financial problems were caused by underemployment, unemployment, and 
separation from his spouse. On September 18, 2015, Applicant filed for bankruptcy 
under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code, and on January 12, 2016, his nonpriority 
unsecured debts were discharged. He made sufficient progress resolving his delinquent 
debts, and financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 7, 2012, Applicant signed and submitted an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (SF-86). On August 21, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective 
on September 1, 2006.    
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to classified 
information and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.   
 
On September 21, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. On 
February 3, 2016, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On April 15, 2016, the 
case was assigned to me. On May 19, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for June 9, 2016. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1-6 into evidence, and after the hearing, Applicant offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A-D).  All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. On June 
16, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). On July 8, 2016, the record was 
closed.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all SOR allegations. The SOR was 
amended adding an additional allegation under Guideline F that Applicant’s debts were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code on January 12, 2016. Applicant 
admitted the additional allegation at his hearing. (Tr. 8) He also provided extenuating 
and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old maintenance worker. (Tr. 13-14; GE 1) He has worked 
for the same employer since August 2012. (Tr. 15; GE 1) His employer has six 
employees. (Tr. 47) In 1975, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 17) In 2000, he 
received an electrician certification. (Tr. 18) Applicant has not served in the U.S. 
military. (Tr. 22) He does not hold a security clearance. (Tr. 15-16) In 2012, he received 
a heavy equipment operator’s license. (Tr. 18) In 1979, he married, and his two children 
are ages 36 and 34. (Tr. 19-21) His spouse has never worked outside their home. (Tr. 
22, 33) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SOR 
response, Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), 
hearing transcript, and hearing exhibits. In November 2010, Applicant’s employer 
substantially reduced his hours and pay, and he was unemployed from November 2011 
to August 2012. (Tr. 23-24; GE 1) When he was laid off, he also became separated 
from his spouse, and he set up a separate household. (Tr. 26-27) Applicant 
subsequently moved back in with his spouse. (Tr. 30) In 2015, Applicant’s gross 
monthly income was $3,420, and his net monthly income was $2,663. (Tr. 31) His 
                                            
1
Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
monthly house payment is $1,292. (Tr. 32) His monthly remainder is $27. (Tr. 35-36) In 
the event of a financial emergency, his son committed to providing financial assistance. 
(Tr. 39; AE C) His 2006 car is paid off. (Tr. 32-33; GE 6) 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling $79,764, and their status is 
as follows: 11 credit card debts were placed for collection in ¶ 1.a for $26,720, ¶ 1.b for 
$11,324, ¶ 1.c for $10,996, ¶ 1.f for $3,999, ¶ 1.g for $2,592, ¶ 1.h for $2,034, ¶ 1.j for 
$827, ¶ 1.l for $437, ¶ 1.m for $2,460, ¶ 1.o for $958, and ¶ 1.p for $486; two education 
loans were placed for collection in ¶ 1.d for $7,718 and ¶ 1.e for $4,237; one medical 
debt was delinquent in ¶ 1.i for $1,000; and two store debts were placed for collection in 
¶ 1.k for $791 and 1.n for $3,185.  
 
Applicant attempted to file for bankruptcy; however, the law firm kept his payment 
and closed their office without filing for bankruptcy on his behalf. (Tr. 40-41) On 
September 18, 2015, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code, and on January 12, 2016, his nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged. (Tr. 
28) His bankruptcy schedules indicate: D—secured claims total $136,162 (mortgage); 
E—unsecured priority claims total $0; and F—unsecured nonpriority claims total 
$82,061 (the SOR debts including his student loans were incorrectly listed as nonpriority 
debts). (GE 6) The two student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e for $7,718 and $4,237 are 
priority debts and not discharged. (Tr. 29) Applicant is current on his student loans and 
on his mortgage. (Tr. 29, 32; GE 6) His other SOR debts are discharged. (Tr. 29-30) He 
received financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. (Tr. 31) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
A character witness described Applicant’s excellent work performance, utmost 
competence, and learning ability. (AE A) She recommended favorable consideration of 
Applicant’s application. (AE A) A friend who has known Applicant for 15 years indicated 
he is honest, professional, and shows initiative in self-improvement and study. (AE D) 
His manager for four years lauded his dedication and diligence. (AE B)  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”; and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, SOR response, OPM PSI, hearing transcript, and hearing exhibits. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
                                            
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply. Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) 
alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling $79,764. His financial problems were caused by 
underemployment, unemployment, and separation from his spouse. On September 18, 
2015, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances on January 12, 2016, when all of his 
delinquent nonpriority, unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the 
Bankruptcy Code.3  
  
                                                                                                                                            
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
3
There is some duplication of debts in Applicant’s bankruptcy schedules. In a bankruptcy filing, 
most debtors list potential creditors, even when the debt may have been resold or transferred to a 
different collection agent or creditor, to ensure notice, and reduce the risk of subsequent dismissal of the 
bankruptcy. If Applicant failed to list some nonpriority unsecured debts on his bankruptcy schedule, this 
failure to list such debts does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, in a no-asset bankruptcy, all 
unsecured, nonpriority debts are discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a discharge, even when 
they are not listed on a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 1996); Francis 
v. Nat’l Revenue Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr. S.D. FL 2010), but see First Circuit Bucks Majority 
on Discharge of Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, American Bankruptcy Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 (Nov. 
2009). There is no requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to discharge the debt. Collier on Bankruptcy, 
Matthey Bender & Company, Inc., 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a)(3)(A). Some categories of priority 
obligations are listed on bankruptcy schedules, but are not discharged by bankruptcy, such as tax debts, 
student loan debts, and child support obligations. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Applicant received financial counseling and generated a budget as part of the 
bankruptcy process. His negative financial situation “occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [Applicant’s] 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” under AG ¶ 20(a). He “acted 
responsibly under the circumstances,” and “the problem is being resolved or is under 
control” as required under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c). Applicant did not provide 
documentation showing he disputed any of his SOR debts, and AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply to any of his SOR debts.      
  
 In sum, Applicant has mitigated all of the delinquent debts listed on his SOR. He 
has not generated any new delinquent debts after January 12, 2016, when his 
nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.  
His resolution of his delinquent debts through the bankruptcy process shows sufficient 
effort, good judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability to warrant mitigation of financial 
considerations concerns.  
 
Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to pay his debts, future new 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His resolution of his delinquent debts and 
payments on his student loans and mortgage account shows some good faith. He has 
sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to continue making progress 
paying his remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will conscientiously endeavor 
to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. Even if financial considerations security concerns are 
not mitigated under Guideline F, they are mitigated under the whole-person concept, 
infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old maintenance worker, who has worked for the same 
employer since August 2012. In 2012, he received a heavy equipment operator’s 
license. His spouse has never worked outside their home. Applicant’s former manager 
and two other character witnesses positively described Applicant’s work performance, 
dedication, diligence, competence, learning ability, honesty, professionalism, and 
initiative. He is sufficiently mature to conscientiously comply with his security 
responsibilities.    
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts were caused by underemployment, unemployment, 
and separation from his spouse. His income is limited, and his spouse does not work 
outside their home. His nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged on January 12, 
2016, through bankruptcy. His secured debt (mortgage) and his priority debts (student 
loans) are current. He is communicating with his creditors and assures he intends to 
pay his debts. He understands the conduct required to retain his security clearance. The 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating: 
  
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility.4 
                                            
4
The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. 
The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security 
significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security 
significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). An administrative judge does not 
have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR 
Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant 
[a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security 
clearance while she works on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
