                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-02418     
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq.,Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated October 26, 2015. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. A notice of
hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for September 8, 2016. Government Exhibits
(GX 1-3) were admitted into the record. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-O. At his request, I kept the record open until September 22, 2016. 
Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX P-V)  The transcript was received on
1
September 16, 2016. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted allegation 1.a and denied the
remaining factual allegations under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Applicant is a 40-year-old operating engineer for a defense contractor. He is
divorced, with two children. Applicant has worked for his current employer since 2011. 
He has never held a security clearance. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts totaling about $12,000. (GX 5) Applicant
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2005 and the debts were discharged in October
2005. (SOR1.a) He acknowledged the bankruptcy, which he stated was the result of his
2005 divorce, debts from the marriage, and the fact that he had full custody of his
children. (Tr. 19) The reduction in income and the fact that he received no money from
his ex-wife resulted in delinquent bills. His wife previously managed the household bills.1
Applicant denied the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, which consist of collection
accounts, judgments, or medical accounts. He stated that he was not aware of many of
them, has paid them, or they are in a repayment plan (AX B). He entered into a debt
management plan in 2015 and has made monthly payments of $391, which were
disbursed to creditors.2 (AX B) He also provided an updated status sheet of how much
has been paid into the repayment plan and  the balance owing on each account. (AX L)
As to SOR 1.b, $1,199 from 1999, the judgment was satisfied on May 12, 2011.
(AX A). As to SOR 1.c, $292 for 2015 a medical account, Applicant submitted
documentation that the account was part of a repayment plan and is paid. (AX P). As to
SOR 1.d, $102, he  stated that he was not aware of the medical debt, but it was paid as
part of his repayment plan. (AX I., L). As to 1.e, $446, for a cable account, this is
included in his repayment plan. (AX B) As to 1.f, $15, Applicant provided documentation
that the medical account is paid in full and was merged with another medical account
that appears in 1.h. (AX U)  As to 1.g, $475, a collection account, this is in repayment
status.  (AX B)  As to the debt in 1.i, $630 for a collection account to a cable company,
that is included in the repayment plan. As to SOR 1.j, $607, Applicant settled the
account in 2015 and provided documentation. (AX C) As to SOR 1.k, $513 for a cable
account, it is included in the plan. AS to SOR 1.l, $182, Applicant paid the amount,
which was for child care, and submitted documentation. (AX Q) As to SOR 1.m, $142,
that debt was satisfied in 2015 and Applicant provided documentation. (AX D)  As to
SOR 1.n, $3,592, Applicant provided an IRS form 1099, cancellation of debt. (AX R) As
to SOR 1.o, $258, that debt has been paid. (AX U) As to SOR 1.p, $294,is in the
      1His ex-wife died in 2007.
      2The payment amount has been reduced to $365 as the debts are paid.
2
repayment plan, but not fully paid. (Tr. 54) As to the debt listed in SOR 1.q, a medical
account, Applicant provided a payment receipt. (AX E) As to SOR 1.r, $1945, 1.s, $795,
1.t, $43, and 1.u, $236, these medical accounts are paid. (AX U)
 Applicant’s annual salary is $85,000. He has a budget that he submitted as a
post-hearing document. (AX V) He is current with his daily bills. He has a net monthly
remainder of about $1,000 a month. He completed financial counseling courses. (AX
M). He has no delinquent debts and is current with tax filings. Applicant also provided
documentation that he has paid other bills that are not listed on the SOR.
Applicant submitted character references from friends, co-workers, and his
security officer. (AX G) Each letter attests to Applicant’s loyalty, trustworthiness, and
good work ethic. He is respected by his peers. Applicant is described as a dedicated
and trustworthy employee. His former supervisor from 2010 described Applicant as
being a team player, professional and reliable. His friend of many years attests to
Applicant’s devotion to family and the challenges he had when he divorced his wife and
her sickness and death. (AX O) In order to reduce expenses, he moved in with his
mother.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG
¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
3
Department Counsel. . . .”3 The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance
of evidence.4 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.5 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”6 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”7 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.8 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and
the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-extended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
      3 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      5 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      6 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
      7 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      8 Id.
4
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially
profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of
trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant admits to a 2005 bankruptcy filing and had 20 delinquent debts on his
credit report. The Government produced credible evidence to establish the debts.
Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a) and
19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
5
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant is the sole provider for his one son. He experienced divorce,
responsibility for debts that were not discharged in bankruptcy and medical bills. He
provided also for his second child from a later relationship. He was credible when he
explained that he was not aware of many of the debts. He enrolled in repayment plan in
2015 and has consistently paid into the agreement by which some bills have been paid
and others are currently being paid. He has received financial counseling. He had not
previously looked at this credit report and was unaware of the delinquent obligations
listed there.  He is steadily employed and has a budget. He has mitigated the financial
concerns.
 Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is a single parent providing for his son. His divorce and the illness and
death of his ex-wife impacted his finances. He filed for bankruptcy protection in 2005, but
subsequently acquired new delinquent debt. He was not aware of many of the accounts
as he did not check his credit report. He moved home with his mother to further reduce
expenses.
Applicant enrolled in a debt management plan and produced documentation in
detail of the accounts that are included and what is paid in full. He is current in his
payments. He has established a track record of responsible actions toward his finances.
He completed financial counseling and works from a budget. He is earning a steady
income. He is a family man. Applicant received character references that rate him as a
loyal and reliable person. He has mitigated the financial consideration security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
7
8
