 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-08845 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 15, 2015. On 
June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 1, 2016, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to me on September 7, 2016. On September 9, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 27, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1, 3, and 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. GX 2, an 
unauthenticated summary of Applicant’s interview by a security investigator, was not 
admitted because Applicant declined to waive the authentication requirement of 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. (Tr. 24.) Applicant testified but did not present the testimony of any 
other witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. I kept the record open until 
October 12, 2016, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He timely submitted 
AX A through J, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on October 6, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c-1.f. He denied SOR ¶ 1.b. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old computer security engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since September 2015. He served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from 
July 2002 to February 2013. He was medically discharged because of a serious back 
injury, and he received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 51-52.) He was unemployed from 
February 2013 to September 2013, worked as a security analyst in the private sector 
until June 2014, and was unemployed from June 2014 until April 2015, when he was 
hired by another defense contractor. He left his job with this defense contractor to 
accept a better position with another employer, but when he reported for work he was 
informed that the company had hired someone else from within the company. He had a 
three-month period of unemployment before he began his current job. (Tr. 33.) He 
received a security clearance while in the Air Force, and he currently holds a clearance. 
(Tr. 9.) 
 
 Applicant married in December 2002. He and his wife have two children, ages 10 
and 8. He has been enrolled in an online university since December 2014 but has not 
received a degree. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his most recent SCA, he disclosed several delinquent 
debts that he attributed to his periods of unemployment. The SOR alleges six delinquent 
debts that are reflected in his credit bureau reports (CBRs) from May 2015 (GX 4) and 
December 2015 (GX 3). The evidence concerning his delinquent debts is summarized 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: delinquent car loan charged off for $12,613. This debt was 
incurred during the summer of 2014, when Applicant was traveling cross-country to look 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
for employment in a less expensive location. The vehicle broke down, and he was 
informed that it would cost about $1,700 to repair it and would take a week to obtain the 
parts and install them. He was unable to afford the repairs or temporary lodging 
expense while the car was being repaired. (Tr. 47-48.) He surrendered the vehicle to 
the lender, a nation-wide financial institution, thereby incurring the deficiency alleged in 
the SOR. He testified that he tried to contact the lender, but all of his telephone calls led 
him to automated answering systems with no human contact. The lender contacted him 
in June 2016, and they made a payment agreement to settle the debt for less than the 
full amount. (Tr. 36-38.) Applicant testified that he made a $1,300 payment on July 1, 
2016. His agreement called for subsequent payments of $1,250 in July, August, and 
September, after which the debt would be satisfied. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 36-37.) His 
bank records for 2016 reflect two transfers of $600 in June; one transfer of $445 in 
June; two transfers of $1,200 in July; one transfer of $150 in July; and transfers of $500 
and $600 in September 2016. (AX H at 2, 3, 5, and 6; AX I at 2; AX J at 5 and 8.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: credit card account charged off for $4,065. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant denied this debt, stating that it was his wife’s debt. His May 2015 CBR 
reflects that he was an authorized user on this account and not liable for the debt. (GX 4 
at 10.) His wife is making regular payments on the debt. (AX A through J, last page of 
each exhibit.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: bank loan charged off for $148. This debt was paid in full on June 
24, 2016. (Answer to SOR; AX H at 3.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: cable service account referred for collection of $135. This debt 
was incurred when Applicant overlooked the final payment after moving out of an 
apartment. He paid this debt in full in June 2016. (Tr. 42-43; AX H at 3.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: claim for apartment damage referred for collection of $937. 
Applicant denied causing any damage. He asked the apartment manager to provide 
proof of the damage, but received no response. When he received the SOR, he decided 
to settle the debt, and he settled it for less than the claimed amount. (June 2015 CBR at 
2, attached to Answer to SOR; Tr. 44.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: credit card account charged off for $8,700. Applicant testified that 
he fell behind on the payments of this debt due to unemployment. The creditor 
contacted him, and they reached an agreement that Applicant would make an initial 
payment of about $1,500 and then make payments of $500 per month until the debt is 
paid. (Tr. 45.) Applicant’s bank statements reflect a payment of $1,966 in November 
2015; payments of $233 and $1,100 in January 2016; and monthly $500 payments from 
February through August 2016. (AX A through J, last page of each exhibit.) 
 
 Applicant’s current net pay per month is between $7,500 and $8,000. His wife is 
also employed, but the record does not reflect her income. He estimates that his net 
monthly remainder after paying all living expenses is about $2,000 (Tr. 34.) 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
5 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, his testimony at the hearing, and the documentary 
evidence submitted at the hearing establish two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and were 
not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant encountered several conditions 
beyond his control: his medical discharge from the Air Force, several periods of 
unemployment, and an unexpected and expensive car breakdown. He attempted to 
contact the lender for his car loan, without success. However, when the lender 
contacted him in June 2016, he responded positively and has taken substantial steps to 
resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. He took no action to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.f 
until he received the SOR and realized that his security clearance was in jeopardy. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. Applicant has not received financial 
counseling, but his financial problems are under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established. This mitigating condition requires a showing of 
good faith. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated 
by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. 
Applicant attempted to contact the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a shortly after the repossession, 
but he took no action to resolve his other debts until he received the SOR. On the other 
hand, the SOR appears to have been a wake-up call, and he has now taken significant 
action to resolve all the debts for which he is liable. He resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d 
even though he thought it was questionable. He is not liable for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, 
which is his wife’s individual account, because he is only an authorized user.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. He disputed it on the ground 
that it was not his debt, and his CBRs supported his challenge. Applicant initially 
disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, but he abandoned his dispute and resolved it. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
7 
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. He served honorably in the Air 
Force for more than ten years and held a security clearance during his service. He had 
multiple periods of unemployment after his Air Force career was ended by a serious 
back injury.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) Applicant was candid about his financial problems 
when he submitted his SCA, but he did not take them seriously until he received the 
SOR. He now realizes his obligation to keep his finances in order. He has resolved or is 
resolving all his delinquent debts. I am satisfied that his financial problems will not 
recur.2 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
2 Administrative judges do not have authority to grant conditional clearances. ISCR Case No. 99-0901, 
2000 WL 288429 at *3 (App. Bd. Mar.1, 2000). However, the Government has the right to reconsider the 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information if incidents of financial irresponsibility recur. See 
ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012).  
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
