 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05066 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 7, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 25, 2016. 
The case was assigned to me on June 8, 2016.  On August 2, 2016, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 24, 2016. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered seven exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 7.  Applicant testified, called one witness 
and offered 21 exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – W. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on September 1, 2016. The record was held open until 
September 7, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely 
submitted AA X – AA, which were admitted without objection. Based upon a review of 
 
2 
 
 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies all SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since 
November 2008. He has held a security clearance since 1992 when he joined the 
United States Army. He served four years on active duty and after that several years in 
the Army National Guard. He was discharged from the Guard in 2007 with an honorable 
discharge. He has a college degree. He is married and supports two children, a seven-
year-old son from a previous marriage, and a four-month-old daughter with his current 
wife. (Tr. at 18, 31-32; Gov 1; AE H; AE I)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that he has a history of financial 
problems. In 2012, Applicant’s wages were garnished at his place of employment for a 
$49,319 debt for delinquent student loans. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 4 at 2) Additional 
delinquent accounts include: a $7,233 account that was placed for collection in 2011 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 6-7, 13); a $7,064 account placed for 
collection in 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 5 at 6); a $196 mattress store account that was 
charged off in 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 at 3; Gov 5 at 6); a $104 cable 
television account that was placed for collection in 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 4 at 3); a 
$6,008 account that was charged off in 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 4 at 3; Gov 5 at 13); and a 
$7,998 credit card account that was placed for collection in 2012. (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 5 at 
7) 
 
Applicant’s son was born in 2009. Both he and his girlfriend worked full-time. 
About a month before their son was born, his girlfriend stopped working. She suffered 
from severe post-partum depression and was unable to return to work. The loss of his 
girlfriend’s income adversely affected Applicant’s financial situation. He had to prioritize 
bills. When his son turned one, they learned that his son had autism. This resulted in 
increased medical bills for his son and his girlfriend remained depressed. He married 
her in 2012 so that she could have health insurance. The relationship did not improve 
after the marriage and they separated in October 2013. They entered into a custody 
battle and eventually divorced in April 2015. Applicant states that he incurred a lot of 
attorney’s fees during the custody proceedings. He and his first wife share joint custody. 
His son is with him about 80% of the time because his ex-wife still suffers from 
depression. He pays $150 a week in child support. (Tr. 24-30, 60-61; AE Q) 
 
Applicant defaulted on his student loans during this period. His wages were 
garnished in late 2012. Applicant entered into a student loan rehabilitation program in 
March 2015. He paid $972 a month for nine months. After the nine-month period was 
complete, Applicant was able to renegotiate a payment plan for a 20-year loan. His 
 
3 
 
 
payments began in March 2016. He pays $145 monthly. Applicant is now current on his 
student loans. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Tr. 30-35; AE L; AE T; AE V; AE W) 
 
The current status of the remaining SOR accounts are:   
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $7,233 delinquent credit card account placed for collection:  The 
collection agency took Applicant to court regarding this debt. In September 2013, the 
collection agency filed a Motion for Summary Judgement. On September 9, 2013, the 
Judge denied the motion. (Tr. 35-36; AE A) The account remains listed on a credit 
report, dated July 2016, but indicates that Applicant disputes the debt. (AE P at 17)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $7,064 account placed for collection:  When Applicant graduated 
from college, he bought a motorcycle using a credit card provided by the company that 
sold him the motorcycle. He purchased the motorcycle before he encountered financial 
problems. He was unable to make payments once his financial issues started. He still 
has the motorcycle. Applicant retained a lawyer and negotiated a payment plan with the 
creditor. He settled the debt for $2,500 in February 2016. (Tr. 37-40; AE B; AE C; AE M; 
AE X) During settlement proceedings, the law firm negotiating the settlement revealed 
that three different collection agencies were collecting on the motorcycle debt. Based on 
my review of the evidence in the case file, including credit reports, I find that the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶.c is the same as the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  $196 charged-off mattress account:  Applicant disputes this debt. He 
purchased a mattress under the terms of no interest if it was paid off within 12 months. 
Applicant claims he paid the mattress off in 12 months. In February 2016, Applicant 
disputed the account with the creditor. The account is not listed on a July 2016 credit 
report. (Tr. 41-42; AE P) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $104 cable television account placed for collection: Applicant paid 
this debt in full in February 2016. (Tr. 43-44; AE E) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: Duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.c. Debt is settled. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: Duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.c. Debt is settled.        
 
Applicant met his current wife in 2014. They married in May 2015 and had a 
daughter in July 2016. Applicant’s current wife works full-time. Their combined annual 
income is over $100,000. Their financial situation has improved. Applicant owns a 
house which they live in. His wife owned a condominium before they married. They rent 
out the condominium. They are current on both mortgage payments. They are able to 
satisfy their financial obligations. After expenses, they have approximately $660 left 
over each month. His wife handles the budget and is very organized. Applicant credits 
his current wife with helping him get his financial affairs in order. (Tr. 44-47, 59-64; AE 
K; AE R; AE S) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Several of Applicant’s co-workers wrote letters on his behalf. One co-worker has 
worked with Applicant on a daily basis for the past eight years. Applicant is described as 
“a person of integrity and character” who is dedicated to “performing a quality job to the 
best of his ability.” She is aware of the allegations against Applicant and believes he is 
now in “a stable position – professionally, financially, and socially.” She recommends 
Applicant maintain his security clearance. Another co-worker describes Applicant as “ a 
reliable and dedicated professional.” The Senior Engineer of a project Applicant has 
worked on for several years is aware of the security clearance allegations and states 
Applicant has never exhibited any actions that would raise concern regarding his 
obligation to protect classified information. He states Applicant acknowledged his past 
financial mistakes and was truthful in his plans to resolve them in a responsible manner. 
(AE G; AE AA) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor interacts with Applicant on a daily basis. He describes 
Applicant as a reliable member of the organization and a technical expert. Applicant 
“displays a high degree of responsibility in his professional interactions and his regard 
for the administrative and physical security policies of the command.” His supervisor 
considers Applicant to be a valuable member of the team and he trusts his professional 
conduct. (AE G)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. Applicant has had a history of 
financial problems, most of which occurred after he graduated from college and started 
a family. Applicant defaulted on his student loans, a balance of over $49,000; and had 
five additional delinquent debts, an approximate balance of $14,597.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
 
6 
 
 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions apply:  
 
 AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.  Most of 
Applicant’s debts occurred after his first wife quit her job one month prior to giving birth 
to their son. The reduction in income prevented Applicant from paying all of his bills. 
Applicant has rehabilitated his student loans and has resolved most of the delinquent 
accounts. His past financial issues do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness or judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.  Several conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control contributed to his financial problems. His first wife’s depression 
prevented her from working. This made it difficult to pay the bills. Their son was 
diagnosed as autistic. His treatment resulted in increased medical costs. When he was 
encountering financial problems, Applicant focused on daily needs. He and his first wife 
divorced and engaged in an expensive custody battle. Once his situation became more 
stable, he began to resolve his delinquent debts. He acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. I note that one of Applicant’s largest debts involved the purchase of a 
motorcycle with a credit card. This action showed poor judgment. However, he 
purchased the motorcycle after graduating from college before he and his first wife  
encountered significant financial problems.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies because Applicant has been resolving his debts. He rehabilitated his student 
loans and is now on a regular payment plan. He resolved the debts alleged in 1.c and 
1.e. The debts alleged in 1.f and 1.g are duplicates of the debt alleged in 1.c.  
Applicant’s budget indicates that his financial situation is under control.  
 
 
7 
 
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant rehabilitated his student loans and is now 
making regular monthly payments towards the loans. He settled the credit card debt 
related to the purchase of a motorcycle (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.g). He paid the cable 
television debt. He is disputing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. Applicant 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his debts.  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d. Regarding  SOR 
¶ 1.b, a judge denied the creditor’s motion for summary judgment. Applicant denies this 
debt and it is noted as being disputed on his most recent credit report. Should it be 
determined that the debt is his, Applicant is now able to afford to settle the debt. 
Applicant formally disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. The amount is minimal and is 
no longer on his most recent credit report.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s eight-year 
history of favorable duty performance with his current employer. I considered the 
positive comments of his supervisor and co-workers.  I considered that Applicant was 
unable to pay all of his bills, including student loans, when his first wife stopped working 
and was unable to work after the birth of their son because of depression. I considered 
that Applicant’s son was diagnosed with autism. I considered Applicant spent a lot of 
money for a divorce attorney and underwent a contentious custody battle. Applicant has 
remarried. Both he and his spouse work full-time. Their daughter was born this past 
 
8 
 
 
July. Applicant credits his current wife with helping him resolve his financial issues. His  
financial situation is now stable. Security concerns under financial considerations are 
mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.g:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
