 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-02488 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Elaine L. Fitch, Esq. 
    
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his past drug involvement. After 
graduating from college over two years ago, he stopped using illegal drugs. He 
presented sufficient evidence, including a good employment and academic record, as 
well as personal and environmental changes, to conclude that it is unlikely he will be 
involved with illegal drugs in the future. His past conduct no longer raises concerns 
about his ability and willingness to follow rules and regulations regarding the proper 
handling of classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On October 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the drug involvement and criminal conduct guidelines.1 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for 
continued access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 11, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed and forwarded the 
case for assignment to an administrative judge to schedule a hearing in the matter. On 
August 12, 2016, I was assigned the case and, after coordinating with the parties, 
scheduled the hearing for September 29, 2016.2 The hearing was convened as 
scheduled, and the exhibits offered by both sides were admitted in evidence without 
objection.3 Applicant elected to testify. No other witnesses were called by either side. 
The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on October 11, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in his early twenties, is employed as an engineer for a defense 
contractor. In connection with his current employment, Applicant submitted a security 
clearance application (SCA) in 2014. Applicant voluntarily disclosed on the SCA his 
experimentation and involvement with illegal drugs, primarily marijuana, while in high 
school and college.  
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 2010. He worked part-time while going 
to school, including at a warehouse during his senior year of high school. He excelled 
academically and was accepted by one of the top schools in the country. He graduated 
from college in 2014, with degrees in electrical engineering and computer science. He 
was heavily involved in community activities while in high school and college, including 
volunteering with Habitat for Humanity building homes for low-income families in a 
distressed urban U.S. community.  
 
 Applicant admits that he started experimenting with illegal drugs in high school 
and continued to use drugs, though on a less frequent basis, throughout college. While 
in high school, Applicant would generally be the one tasked with purchasing the 
marijuana for himself and his friends. He would charge his friends and make some extra 
money in the process. He credibly testified that he last used any illegal drugs shortly 
before graduating from college in May 2014.  
 
 After graduating from college, Applicant received several job offers, a mix of 
private employers and federal contractors. He chose to begin his professional career for 
his current employer, in part, because he wants to put his talents to work for the national 
defense and is considering joining the U.S. military. His performance appraisals reflect 
that he has consistently met or exceeded job requirements and goals. (Ax. B) His 
current supervisor, an officer in the U.S. military, and a former roommate submitted 
reference letters attesting to Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and overall good 
character (Ax. C) Applicant’s supervisor notes that Applicant has “performed 
exceptional work” and “stepped up to get results during schedule crunches.” (Ax. C) 
                                                          
2 Correspondence with the parties, the notice of hearing, and case management order are attached as 
Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 and Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.) A and B were admitted at hearing. I 
subsequently marked the three reference letters that Applicant submitted with his Answer as Ax. C.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant grew up and went to high school in State A, attended college in State 
B, and now resides, works, and is attending graduate school in State C. He anticipates 
receiving a master’s degree in 2019. He plays on his company’s softball team, and his 
current group of friends primarily consists of coworkers and others who work for the 
federal government, either as direct employees or as cleared government contractors. 
He no longer regularly associates with those he used drugs with in high school or 
college. In addition to disclosing his past drug involvement on his SCA and discussing 
the matter fully at hearing, Applicant told his parents about his past drug involvement. 
He credibly testified that he will not use or have any other involvement with illegal drugs 
in the future on condition of automatic revocation of his security clearance. (Tr. 40) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s past use of marijuana and other drugs, as well as his more extensive 
involvement with marijuana in high school, raise the drug involvement security concern. 
The record evidence also establishes the following disqualifying conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse;4 and  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia.  
 
 Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred more than two years ago, before he 
graduated from college and began his professional career. He chose to work for a 
federal contractor, knowing full well that such employment is incompatible with his past 
lifestyle. In the past 30-plus months, Applicant has amassed a good employment 
record, started graduate school, and made other changes in his personal life 
demonstrating a clear break from his past. When visiting family in State A, Applicant has 
found himself in circumstances where he suspected others were possibly using illegal 
drugs. He immediately removed himself from the environment and otherwise acted as 
expected of cleared individuals.  
 
 Additionally, Applicant has been candid about his past drug involvement from the 
outset of the security clearance process. He also told his parents about his past drug 
involvement. Through these voluntary disclosures, Applicant not only demonstrated the 
honesty and trustworthiness demanded of cleared contractors, but also removed this 
matter as a potential source of vulnerability. In short, Applicant established that his past 
involvement with illegal drugs is unlikely to be repeated and he can be entrusted with 
classified information. In reaching this favorable conclusion, I considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a) and the following mitigating conditions:  
                                                          
4 The Directive defines “drug abuse” as the “illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.” See AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; [or] (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern regarding criminal conduct is explained at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s past illegal drug involvement raises the criminal conduct security 
concern. See AG ¶ 16(c). However, for similar reasons explained under Guideline G, 
Applicant’s past conduct no longer raises a concern about applicant’s current judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to follow rules and regulations. See AG ¶¶ 17(c), 
17(e), 17(g). 
 
  A security clearance determination is not intended to punish a person for past 
conduct. Instead, an administrative judge examines a person’s past conduct and 
present circumstances to make a predictive judgment about how they might handle their 
security obligations and responsibilities in the future.5 Here, Applicant mitigated the 
concerns raised by his past conduct. Since graduating from college, Applicant has 
matured greatly, as well as made changes to his environment and those with whom he 
associates. This record evidence of change and reform, coupled with Applicant’s 
honesty during the security clearance process, leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about his ability and willingness to follow rules and regulations regarding the proper 
handling and safeguarding of classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are not an 
exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that 
person's past conduct and present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529).  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
