 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04706 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 21, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 18, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 5, 2016. Applicant 
requested an expedited hearing and waived the notice requirements. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 26, 
 
2 
 
 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 2, 2016. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 14, 2016.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He was born in Afghanistan and graduated from high 
school in 2000. He attended college, but did not earn a degree. He emigrated from 
Afghanistan to the United States in 2006 and became a naturalized citizen in 2011. 
After becoming a citizen he sponsored his Afghan fiancée for entry into the United 
States. They married in the United States in 2012, and she is a permanent resident of 
the United States. She intends on becoming a U.S. citizen. They have two children born 
in the United States.1 
 
 In 2002, Applicant began working as a linguist for a U.S. government contractor. 
He served with the U.S. Army and was attached to a Special Forces unit where he 
participated in combat missions until 2005. He was granted a visa and came to the 
United States in 2006. He worked at a café and also participated in military rotations 
where he would teach troops about the culture in Afghanistan before they deployed. In 
2008, he was offered a job with a government contractor and worked in Afghanistan 
with the U.S. Marines for about a year. He then was hired as a linguist by another 
government contractor and lived and worked in Afghanistan until 2012. He lived in 
Afghanistan from 2008 to 2012. Before he obtained his U.S. citizenship, he would return 
to the United States to renew his travel documents. He has been employed by his 
current employer, a government contractor, since 2012.2 
  
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. In 2014, Applicant 
assisted them in applying for visas to move to the United States. Both of his parents 
were interviewed by embassy officials in February 2016. In September 2016, his father 
received notification from the U.S. embassy in Afghanistan that his immigration visa was 
                                                          
1 Tr. 26-28. 
 
2 Tr. 28-31; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
almost complete. It requested he provide his passport and a medical examination 
before proceeding further, which he did. He is now waiting for the visa to be issued. 
Applicant provided a copy of the notification document.3 His mother’s immigration visa is 
pending. Applicant intends to take care of his parents when they reside in the United 
States. He wants to provide them a comfortable life. His parents are aware that 
Applicant is working in Afghanistan, but do not know his job. They were aware that he 
was working for a U.S. government contractor involved in military operations from 2002 
to 2006.4  
 
Applicant’s father is a retired colonel in the Afghan Army. He is 67 years old. 
Applicant does not know when he retired or if he receives a military pension, but 
believes if he does it is minimal. His mother is 64 years old and is a homemaker.5  
 
Applicant provides his parents some financial support when they are in need. His 
father had heart surgery and his mother has a knee issue. They sometimes need 
assistance with paying for their medications. Applicant testified that the support he 
provides is as needed and not regularly.6 Applicant does not travel off of the military 
compound in Afghanistan. He does not visit his family. The last time he saw his parents 
was in 2012.7  
 
 Applicant has six sisters and three brothers who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. All of his sisters are married. Applicant explained that culturally when a 
woman marries, her husband then becomes responsible for her. His sisters no longer 
live in the family home. Two live with their husband’s families. One sister lives in 
Germany with her husband who is a German citizen. She intends to take the exam to 
become a German citizen. She has lived in Germany for 20 years. Applicant has more 
contact with her. The remaining sisters live with their husband’s on their own. He 
testified that he may have contact with them once a year or once every couple of years. 
They are unaware that Applicant works for an American contractor or the specifics of his 
job. They are also unaware when Applicant is in Afghanistan.8  
 
 Two of Applicant’s brothers live with his parents. They are 20 and 18 years old, 
and both are in school. The plan is for Applicant’s father to apply for visas for them if 
they are still under 21 years old when his father receives his immigration visa. Applicant 
has discussed this issue with an attorney and was advised if his father immigrates 
                                                          
3 AE C. 
 
4 Tr. 32-40, 55-58. 
 
5 Tr. 40-41, 48-49. 
 
6 Tr. 43. 
 
7 Tr. 50-51. 
 
8 Tr. 36-38, 50, 52-54. 
 
 
4 
 
 
before January 2017, these brothers will be able to join their father. If he does not meet 
that deadline, the 20-year-old will have to apply on his own. This brother knows 
Applicant works in Afghanistan, but does not know the nature of his business. Applicant 
does not know what information his 18-year-old brother is privy to. Applicant had a 
fourth brother, the youngest, but he is deceased. The remaining brother, who is older, 
lives in Afghanistan and has a taxi and painting business. He is married. He is unaware 
when Applicant is in Afghanistan or that Applicant works for a U.S. contractor.9  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. His mother-in-law lives in Afghanistan and 
is in poor health. She lives with her younger son. Applicant’s wife contacts her mother 
about once or twice a month by telephone or Skype.10  
 
Applicant is grateful to his adopted country for the opportunities he has been 
afforded. In 2013, he purchased a house in the United States and paid the total cost 
with his savings. He testified that when he was working in Afghanistan he saved all of 
his money. He lived on the military compound and had minimal expenses. This was how 
he was able to purchase his house. He owns a car and has made financial investments, 
some were not successful. He has about $30,000 in savings in the United States. He 
has no assets in Afghanistan. His parents have a house in Afghanistan that his brothers 
will inherit. He intends to remain in the United States, raise his family, and take care of 
his parents.11  
  
 Applicant provided numerous letters and certificates of appreciation and merit for 
his service to the combined U.S. and Afghan forces that spanned his years of service. 
Each letter consistently praises his abilities and willingness to assist the forces. He is 
characterized as a dedicated and hard worker who is willing to do whatever it takes to 
assist in accomplishing the mission. He was repeatedly involved in combat operations 
and faced imminent danger. The most recent letter, from 2016, is from the deputy 
commander of a task force for whom Applicant served as his interpreter. He stated: “I 
trust him to not only accurately communicate my thoughts, but even defend my life if 
required.”12 
 
A Certificate of Commendation from the U.S. Marine Corps for Applicant’s 
service in 2008 stated in part:  
   
[Applicant] was required to devote countless hours riding with combat 
logistic patrols, as well as, assisting the personal security detachment 
during transactions with local national truck drivers. His efforts were vital 
to ensure that combat logistics patrols were ready to head into enemy 
                                                          
9 Tr. 38-40, 55-58. 
 
10 Tr. 41-43, 60. 
 
11 Tr. 32, 43-49. 
 
12 AE A, B. 
 
5 
 
 
territory. He continually displayed motivation and enthusiasm that played 
an integral role in the platoon’s safe and successful completion of 20 
combat logistics patrols.13 
 
A character witness testified on behalf of Applicant. He was described as hard-
working, honest, reliable, and loyal to the United States. The witness is aware of 
Applicant’s wife’s intention of becoming a naturalized citizen of the United States.14  
 
Afghanistan15 
 
 The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel in 
Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations 
against U.S. citizens. Travel to all areas remain unsafe due to the ongoing risk of 
kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed 
rivalry between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and indirect fire, 
suicide bombings and insurgent attacks, including attacks using vehicle-borne or other 
improvised explosive devices. Attacks may also target official Afghan and U.S. 
government convoys and compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and 
other public areas.  
 
Extremist groups and members of other armed opposition groups are active 
throughout the country, attacking Afghan and foreign government facilities, with little 
regard for civilian casualties. According to the State Department’s 2015 Country 
Reports on Terrorism, Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated 
attacks by the Taliban and other insurgent and terrorist groups. Border regions between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan remain a safe haven for terrorists.  
 
Afghanistan has significant human rights problems that are widespread. They 
include armed insurgent groups attacks on civilians and killing of persons affiliated with 
the government; torture and abuse of detainees by government forces; widespread 
disregard for the rule of law; and little accountability for those participating in human 
rights abuses; as well as targeted violence and societal discrimination against women 
and girls.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
13 AE A, B. 
 
14 Tr. 71-77. 
 
15 GE 2. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
7 
 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie 
must be considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”16 
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Afghanistan. She is a permanent resident of the 
United States and lives with Applicant and their two American-born children in the 
United States. Applicant’s wife has contact with her mother in Afghanistan. His parents 
are citizens and residents of the Afghanistan. Applicant is sponsoring both for 
immigration and his father’s visa is in the final stage of processing. His mother’s visa is 
pending. His youngest brother will be included in the process. Whether his 20-year-old 
brother is also included will depend when the visa is issued. Applicant’s older brother 
and five sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His sixth sister is a citizen of 
Afghanistan and resides in Germany with her husband. Applicant has contact with his 
parents and younger brothers. He maintains some contact with his sisters and older 
brother.  
 
Terrorist activity, militant attacks, extremist groups, and members of other armed 
opposition groups are active throughout the country, attacking Afghan and foreign 
government facilities, with little regard for civilian casualties. It has a poor human rights 
record with widespread disregard for the rule of law and little accountability for those 
participating in human rights abuses. Applicant’s relationship with his relatives living in 
Afghanistan creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 
7(d) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant’s wife is a permanent resident of the United States. She lives in the 
United States with their two American-born children. Her status and residence makes it 
unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between her 
and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies to Applicant’s wife. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant is sponsoring his parents to immigrate to the United States. His father’s 
visa is pending and his mother’s is in the process. His younger brothers will be included 
in the process, dependent on their age at the time of approval. Applicant has not seen 
these family members since 2012, but has more than casual ties with them as he plans 
on supporting them when they come to the United States and provides them with 
money for medical purposes.  
 
Applicant has worked for U.S. government contractors and been involved in 
military operations at different intervals and extended periods since 2002. He moved to 
the United States in 2006 and became a citizen in 2011. He brought his fiancée, now 
wife, to the United States. His children were born in the United States. He owns a home, 
car and has investments. He plans on caring for his parents and brothers when they 
immigrate to the U.S. His wife has contact with her mother. He has some contact with 
his siblings. There is no evidence these family members have any unusual contact with 
the Afghan government. However, the foreign influence concerns are increased 
because of terrorist and extremist activities in Afghanistan. There is widespread 
disregard for the rule of law and human rights. I cannot find that it is unlikely that 
Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
family and the interests of the United States. I also find that Applicant’s contact with his 
relatives in Afghanistan is not casual. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence, and I find that Applicant’s commitment and 
loyalty to the United States is evidenced through his participation in military combat 
operations, and he has established a firm footprint in the United States. His substantial 
assets are all in the United States. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s 
proven record of action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to 
a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”17 I find Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies to Applicant’s wife, mother-in-law and his relatives in Afghanistan.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 32 years and has been a naturalized-citizen of the United States 
since 2011. He has worked for U.S. government contractors since 2002 and has been 
involved in combat operations. His wife is a permanent resident and his children were 
born in the United States. He is sponsoring his parents for immigration and his father’s 
visa is pending and his mother’s is in the process. He owns a home. He has a car and 
other investments. Although he has familial ties to Afghanistan they are minimized 
through his sponsorship for immigration for his parents and younger brothers. I have 
considered Applicant’s service and loyalty to the United States military forces. I am 
convinced that his loyalty and commitment to the United States is without reservation, 
and he would protect its interests if an issue were to arise. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign 
influence guideline security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
