 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00307 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and G (Alcohol Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 11, 2015. On June 
9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines J 
and G. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 
154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 1, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 3, 2016, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to me on September 7, 2016. On September 9 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 27, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through N, which were admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open until October 7, 2016, to enable Department 
Counsel to determine if there was a third page for GX 4, showing disposition of the 
charges alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. She timely submitted a third page, which has been 
added to GX 4. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 5, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old production foreman employed by a defense contractor 
since July 1980. He began working for his current employer immediately after 
graduating from high school in 1980, and he received a security clearance shortly 
thereafter. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 Applicant married in March 1987, separated in 1991 or 1992, and divorced in 
September 1993. He remarried in February 2007. He has a nine-year-old daughter and 
four adult step-children, ages 31, 29, 28, and 26.  
 
 Applicant has an extensive criminal record. It is summarized below in 
chronological order and in reverse order of the allegations in the SOR.   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h. In July 1985, Applicant was convicted of driving under the influence 
(DUI). He was fined and given a suspended jail sentence.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g. In February 1993, Applicant was arrested for misdemeanor domestic 
assault, destroying private property, and misdemeanor assault. The domestic assault 
and destruction of property charges were dismissed, and he was convicted of the 
misdemeanor assault. (GX 3.) The charges arose from mutual fistfight between 
Applicant and his estranged wife’s boyfriend. (GX 4 at 2; Tr. 44.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f. In May 1993, Applicant was arrested for misdemeanor possession of 
marijuana. The charges were dismissed. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e. In June 1995, Applicant was arrested for DUI (2nd offense). He was 
convicted, fined $1,000 ($750 suspended), sentenced to 12 months in jail (all but four 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
3 
 
days suspended), placed on unsupervised probation for three years, and required to 
attend alcohol education classes. (GX 1 at 28; GX 4 at 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d. In August 1997, Applicant was arrested for felony obstruction of 
justice, after he refused to answer the door for police who wanted to serve a warrant on 
a guest in his house. (Tr. 52.) A nolle prosequi was entered. (GX 3 at 2; GX 4 at 3.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c. In May 2001, Applicant was charged with DUI (3rd offense) and 
refusal to submit to a breath-alcohol test. He was sentenced to 12 months in jail 
(suspended) and a fine for the DUI. A nolle prosequi was entered for the breath-alcohol 
test refusal. (GX 3 at 2; GX 4 at 3.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b. In October 2007, Applicant was charged with misdemeanor assault 
on a family member. The incident occurred when Applicant wanted to put his daughter, 
then one month old, in a bassinet to sleep. His 29-year-old stepdaughter (then 21 years 
old) insisted sleeping in bed with the baby. His stepdaughter was holding the baby 
tightly in her arms and refused to let Applicant take the baby. After a scuffle and some 
argument, his stepdaughter relinquished the baby. Applicant then picked up his 
stepdaughter in a bear hug and removed her from the home, with the stepdaughter 
punching and scratching him as she was being ejected. The police arrived as Applicant 
was ejecting her. (GX 2 at 11-12; Tr. 35-36.) The prosecutor entered a nolle prosequi 
after Applicant’s stepdaughter failed to appear at his trial. (GX 3 at 2; Tr. 56.)   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a. In May 2015, Applicant was again charged with misdemeanor assault 
on a family member. This incident arose when Applicant’s wife and his stepdaughter 
returned home after a concert. Both were intoxicated, and Applicant asked his wife who 
had driven, because he knew his stepdaughter did not have a driver’s license. His 
stepdaughter interrupted the conversation between Applicant and his wife, and 
Applicant asked her to leave. His stepdaughter began screaming and trying to hit 
Applicant. He retreated to another part of the house and called the police. His 
stepdaughter followed him and continued to punch and slap him. Applicant’s seven-
year-old daughter attempted to intervene, and his stepdaughter pushed her away and 
knocked her to the ground. Applicant grabbed his stepdaughter and began to drag her 
out of the house. He let her go when she promised to leave peacefully, but she then 
threw a toy baby stroller at him and attempted to strike him again. He picked her up in a 
bear hug and dragged her out the door. She began to walk away as the police arrived. 
(GX 2 at 4; Tr. 36-38.) 
 
Applicant’s stepdaughter was charged with assault on a family member. During 
the affray, Applicant’s wife had fallen to the floor. She did not believe she was injured, 
but she discovered the next day that she had broken ribs, apparently from falling on the 
arm of a sofa. Applicant’s stepdaughter filed a complaint against Applicant for assaulting 
his wife. He was arrested and held in jail for three days until he could make bail. The 
charge of assaulting his wife was dismissed, but he was convicted of assaulting his 
stepdaughter by placing his hands on her after she agreed to leave the house. (GX 2 at 
 
4 
 
5-7; Tr. 38-39, 62.) He testified that the charges were dismissed on appeal. (Tr. 63.) 
The court records recite, “Disposition not received.” (GX 4 at 3.) 
 
 In a personal subject interview (PSI) by a security investigator in September 
2015, Applicant told the investigator that he believes his stepdaughter is bipolar and on 
medication. He has physically removed her from his home four times since 2007, and 
she has been arrested several times by the police. (GX 2 at 12.) She has moved to 
another state far away, and Applicant has had no contact with her since the May 2015 
incident. (Tr. 64-65.) 
 
 The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.h were previously alleged in an SOR dated April 
19, 2006, considered by an administrative judge, and resolved in Applicant’s favor. (GX 
4; ISCR Case No. 05-15659 (AJ Williams, Dec. 28, 2006).) 
 
 After Applicant’s DUI conviction in May 2001, he stopped consuming alcohol until 
Christmas 2004, when he had two or three beers at a party. At the hearing, he testified 
that he has not consumed alcohol since Christmas 2004. He attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous meetings and received counseling until 2007. (GX 2 at 9; Tr. 64.) 
 
 Applicant’s general foreman has known Applicant for 22 years. He states that 
Applicant has always exceeded job expectations and can be trusted to take on any task 
and make the outcome successful. He considered Applicant a very engaged husband 
and father and a good friend. (AX A.) Another supervisor has known Applicant since the 
early 1980s and considers him a hard worker who takes great pride in his work, trains 
his crew well, and has earned the respect of his subordinates. (AX B.) A co-worker who 
has known Applicant for 10 years describes him as an organized and conscientious 
supervisor. (AX C.) One of Applicant’s subordinates considers him an honest and 
hardworking supervisor who treats his subordinates fairly and professionally. (AX D.) 
Another co-worker who has known Applicant for 10 years considers him a dependable 
and intelligent co-worker who has shown “great leadership” as a supervisor. Applicant 
has received numerous awards and commendations for excellent performance (AX F 
through L.) His most recent performance evaluation rated him as a “3” on a 4-point 
scale (1 = below expectations; 2 = meets expectations; 3 = exceeds expectations; 4 = 
far exceeds expectations). (AX M.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
 
5 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence of his record of 
arrests and convictions establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted, or convicted”).  
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 32(c): evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
 AG ¶ 32(a) is established. The conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.-1.h happened long 
ago. Applicant has not consumed alcohol or had any alcohol-related incidents since 
Christmas 2004. The May 2015 incident was unusual in that his stepdaughter chased 
him when he attempted to retreat and continued to attack him until he physically 
subdued her. His combative stepdaughter no longer resides near his home and he has 
had no contact with her since the May 2015 incident. The conduct that occurred in May 
2015 is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(c) is established for the May 2015 incident alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Applicant’s testimony at the hearing was consistent with his September 2015 PSI. His 
testimony reflects that he was a victim of his stepdaughter’s violence, that he attempted 
to retreat, and that he resorted to physically restraining her as a last resort. However, 
this mitigating condition is not established for the incident alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, 
because Applicant admitted that he reinitiated the altercation after the earlier scuffle 
ended, and he physically ejected his stepdaughter from the home.  
 
 
7 
 
 AG 32(d) is established for the offenses alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b-1.h, based on the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity and Applicant’s excellent 
employment record.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the DUI convictions alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.h 
under this guideline. The concern is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol consumption 
often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, 
and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” Applicant’s 
record of DUI convictions establishes the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence . . . .”  
 
 No other disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established. There is no 
evidence of alcohol-related incidents at work, binge drinking, a diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence or alcohol abuse, or relapse after completion of an alcohol rehabilitation 
program. Applicant was required to attend alcohol safety education classes after several 
of his DUI convictions, but these classes are not a rehabilitation program within the 
meaning of this guideline. 
 
 Applicant’s last DUI conviction was in May 2001. The security concerns raised by 
his alcohol consumption are mitigated under AG 23(a): “so much time has passed, or 
the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline J and G in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer and held a security clearance for 
all of his adult life. He was candid, sincere, and credible at the personal appearance. He 
has overcome his problems with alcohol. He enjoys an excellent reputation among his 
co-workers and supervisors. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
G, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his criminal record and alcohol 
consumption. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
