 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-08632 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt, which raised 
security concerns about his eligibility for continued access to classified information. He 
has yet to take action to address his past-due debts and his overall financial situation 
continues to raise a security concern. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On January 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.1 On February 10, 2015, Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. (Answer) 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On April 8, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. Applicant’s hearing was scheduled, with the 
agreement of the parties, for May 28, 2015.2 The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. All exhibits were admitted into 
evidence without objection. At Applicant’s request, the record was kept open for three 
weeks to provide him the opportunity to submit additional documents in support of his 
case. He did not submit any documents post-hearing. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was 
received on June 5, 2015, and the record closed on June 19, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, recently divorced, has three children who he financially supports. He 
has earned two associate’s degrees and is a few credit hours shy of earning a 
bachelor’s degree in business management. He served in the U.S. military for 22 years. 
His service included a deployment in support of the first Gulf War. In 2011, Applicant 
was forced to retire from the military due to reaching higher year tenure. He retired in 
the E-6 paygrade, and received an honorable discharge. After retiring, Applicant was 
unemployed for several months before securing a job with his current employer in 
February 2012. (Tr. at 24-25, 28-31, 48; Gx. 1) 
 
While unemployed, Applicant’s marriage started to fall apart. He and his now 
former wife separated in the spring of 2013, and their divorce was finalized in early 
2015. Applicant testified that his financial problems are directly related to his divorce, 
which he described as “long” and “ugly.” (Tr. at 25)  
 
Applicant explained that his former wife received rental income for one of the 
properties he had purchased while in the military, but she did not use the money to pay 
the mortgage. His former wife’s actions, as well as the inability to rent the property for 
some time, left Applicant unable to pay the mortgage and the property was eventually 
foreclosed. SOR debt 1.a for over $117,000, relates to the deficiency balance owed 
after the property was foreclosed and sold at auction. Applicant accepted responsibility 
for this debt in his divorce. He discussed this debt with a security clearance background 
investigator in 2013, and a year later was asked about the status of the debt in an 
interrogatory sent to him by DOD adjudicators. The last time Applicant spoke to the 
creditor regarding the debt was in 2013. (Tr. at 27, 33-38, 49; Gx. 2; Ax. A at 4) 
 
Applicant owned a second home that he purchased while in the military, and was 
unable to pay the mortgage. He resolved the delinquent mortgage on this second home 
through a short sale. (Tr. at 26, 50)  
 
The SOR lists 11 non-mortgage related delinquent debts, which together total 
over $25,000. The debts include a collection account for $75 listed at ¶ SOR 1.l, and 
two charged off credit card accounts totaling over $14,000 that are listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I (prehearing correspondence and scheduling order).  
 
3 
 
 
and 1.c. Applicant accepted responsibility for these two credit card debts in his divorce. 
(Ax. A) He discussed the $75 debt in SOR 1.l with a security clearance background 
investigator in 2013. (Gx. 2)  
 
Applicant was asked about the SOR debts in the financial interrogatory that was 
sent to him by DOD adjudicators in 2014. The interrogatory specifically asked him to 
provide documentation to verify the status of the debts, to include any payments made 
toward satisfaction of the debts. In his interrogatory response, Applicant claimed that he 
had resolved some of the debts and disputed others. He submitted no documentation to 
corroborate his claims. (Gx. 2) 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all the SOR debts, except a $1,550 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f and a $205 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. All the SOR debts 
are listed on at least one of the credit reports admitted at hearing. (Gx. 3 – 5)  
 
At hearing, Applicant again claimed that he had resolved or was in the process of 
resolving some of the SOR debts, to include the two minor debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.j 
and 1.l, which together total about $150. He noted he had forgotten to bring supporting 
documentation and the record was kept open for three weeks to provide him the 
opportunity to submit such documentation. Applicant did not submit any documentation 
post-hearing to substantiate his hearing testimony. (Tr. at 27, 38-44, 49, 52-56) 
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. He earns approximately $78,000 
annually from his job as a federal contractor. He testified that, after paying his monthly 
expenses, he has about $1,100 monthly in discretionary income that he plans to use to 
resolve his past-due debts. (Tr. at 44-51)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
4 
 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Thus, the financial considerations security “concern is broader than the possibility that 
an applicant might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money 
in satisfaction of his or her debts.”4 The concern also encompasses financial 
                                                          
3 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. 
Bd. June 26, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsibility, which may indicate that an applicant would also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of a significant amount of delinquent debt that remains 
unaddressed raises the financial considerations security concern. The record evidence 
establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s financial situation is, in part, due to his divorce. He responsibly 
addressed the delinquent mortgage on his second home through a short sale. However, 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply nor does it fully mitigate the concerns at issue because, 
despite being aware of the Government’s concerns regarding his past-due debts, 
Applicant has yet to take action to responsibly address the overwhelming amount of 
delinquent debt that he has accumulated over the last several years.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, substantial, and ongoing. He did not 
submit documentation to corroborate his claims that he satisfied or is in the process of 
resolving the SOR debts, to include the two minor debts identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1l. 
He also did not submit any documentation to substantiate the basis of his dispute 
regarding any of the SOR debts. He has yet to take any concrete action, to include 
receiving financial counseling, to take control of and improve his financial situation. 
Accordingly, none of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
6 
 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.5 Applicant failed to meet his burden.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F. I gave due consideration to all the favorable and 
extenuating factors in this case, to include Applicant’s military service, the length of time 
he has held a security clearance, and the financial support he provides his children. 
However, the favorable record evidence does not outweigh the security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. He has yet to take control of his finances and address his past-
due debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s 
present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
