 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-09086 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant denied the three allegations raised in the 
SOR. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on April 27, 2015. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 2015, setting the hearing for May 27, 2015. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered four documents and a demonstrative exhibit, which 
were accepted without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-4 and Demonstrative Ex. (DE) 1, 
respectively. The Applicant offered testimony and two documents, accepted as Exs. A-
B. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 3, 2015, and the record was closed.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old operations manager. He has served in that position for 
six years. Previously, he was honorably discharged at the rank of E-9 from active duty 
in the United States military. Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree in information 
systems management and advanced certification in acquisition management. He is 
married with two children.  
 
 In 2002, Applicant and his family moved to a new state, which had a higher cost 
of living than their previous residence. Then their eldest child went away to college. 
Between 2007 and 2009, small balances became past-due accounts. Feeling 
overwhelmed, he contacted a financial counseling and debt reduction service in 2011. It 
helped him better understand credit, analyze his debt, establish a budget, and set up a 
repayment plan for his obligations. Tr. 19. Applicant found the counseling productive 
and helpful in addressing his situation. Tr. 20. He and his wife learned how to save 
money for emergencies. Tr. 20. Since using this service, he and his wife have been 
“really careful to make sure that this [type of situation] never happens again.” Tr. 20.  
 
Applicant no longer has any adverse financial issues. Tr. 28. He and his wife now 
have a combined salary which has grown to about $200,000. This sum is more than 
sufficient to address their expenses, and permit them to help with their youngest child’s 
educational and living expenses in a distant state. Tr. 31. They are ahead in their 
mortgage payments and current on all bills. It is Applicant’s intent to stay financially 
stable, adhere to what he learned in financial counseling, and remain prepared for 
whatever financial pitfalls may occur in the future. Tr. 34.  
 
 At issue in the SOR are three delinquent debts (1.a-1.c). The debt noted at 1.a 
for $4,113 was addressed with the help of Applicant’s counseling and debt reduction 
entity. Tr. 15. The balance was reduced to $800 and ultimately satisfied. DE1; Ex. B; Tr. 
15-18. The obligation reflected at SOR allegation 1.b for $3,309 was paid. DE1; Ex. A; 
Tr. 14-15. The debt alleged in the SOR at 1.c for $12,288 previously was shown as 
satisfied in Applicant’s response to the SOR, which included a copy of the judgment 
release and a letter from the creditor’s attorney. DE1; SOR Answer at 5; Exs. 2-3; Tr. 
22-26. Consequently, the three debts at issue have been addressed. Tr. 8. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
 
 
 
 
4 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant was 
delinquent on nearly $20,000 in debt. Such facts are sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant began addressing the delinquent debts at issue in 2011. Those three 
obligations are now satisfied. Applicant’s successful efforts are largely attributable to 
excellent financial counseling and personal diligence. Since starting financial counseling 
and up to today, Applicant has employed the many basics he learned in counseling, 
such as budgeting, saving for contingencies, living within his means, and other core 
personal finance concepts. He and his wife have demonstrated their ability to live 
without acquiring new debts. Importantly, Applicant is highly credible in his statements 
when emphasizing his commitment to remaining solvent and free from financial distress.   
All the debts at issue have been addressed. AG ¶ 20(c)-(d) apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature and credible man with a stable job history and decades of 
active duty military service to his credit. A move to a costlier region and the college 
education of his eldest child led to Applicant’s acquisition of delinquent debt in the late 
2000s. In 2011, Applicant enrolled in a financial counseling and debt reduction program. 
The experience was highly beneficial. He has satisfied the debts at issue in the SOR, 
adopted a budget, started saving for emergencies, and is now living well within his 
means.   
 
This process demands that an applicant methodically devise a strategy or plan to 
address his debts in a manageable and realistic manner. It then requires documentary 
evidence that such a plan has been successfully implemented. Applicant met these 
criteria. In addition, he showed that he is now living within his means and free from 
financial distress. Applicant also demonstrated his diligence and commitment to 
remaining debt free. Given these considerations, I find that Applicant mitigated security 
concerns arising under Guideline F.       
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
