 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09479 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 23, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 23, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for July 22, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. She submitted documents that were marked AE B through L and admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 29, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 1980. She seeks to retain her security clearance, which she 
has held for many years. She attended college for a period, but she did not earn a 
degree. She married in 1984 and divorced in 2000. She has two adult children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling about $4,260 and three federal tax 
liens totaling about $31,500. Applicant stated that all the debts, with the exception of the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d ($432), have been paid or are in payment plans. She stated 
that she was attempting to make payment arrangements with the owner of the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.  
 
 Applicant and her children had medical issues that contributed to her financial 
problems. Applicant established that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($837) and 1.j 
($1,111) have been paid. Her documentary evidence is less than conclusive, but I am 
satisfied that the remaining non-tax debts have been paid, are in a payment plan, or are 
otherwise not of security significance.2 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k ($17,894), 1.l ($11,993), and 1.m ($1,620) allege federal tax liens 
that were filed in 2010 and 2012. The two larger tax liens are listed in credit reports from 
June 2012, October 2014, and May 2015. The $1,620 tax lien does not appear on the 
2014 and 2015 reports. Applicant stated that for about three years in the 2000s, both 
she and her ex-husband claimed one of their children on their income tax returns. Her 
husband was permitted to claim the children if he was current on his child support, but 
Applicant stated that he was not current. The IRS disallowed her exemption and 
imposed a higher tax liability. She also stated that she withdrew funds from her 401(k) 
retirement account when she went on strike in 2006, and she was unaware the 
withdrawal generated tax consequences.3 
 
Applicant stated that she has been on a repayment plan with the IRS since 2007. 
The IRS also seizes her refunds. She stated that she receives a statement every month, 
and her last statement showed a balance of about $17,000. She was informed of the 
importance of proving her payments through documentary evidence. Applicant 
submitted only one document related to her taxes in her post-hearing submission. It is a 
November 2014 letter from the IRS noting that Applicant had an installment agreement 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33, 57-58; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 44, 50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE A-F, H-L. 
 
3 Tr. at 20-24, 33-34, 46-47, 55-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
3 
 
for tax year 2005. It states that Applicant paid $470 on October 16, 2014, and the next 
$470 payment was due by November 15, 2014. The remaining balance was $36,298.4 
 
Applicant received financial counseling. She admitted that her finances were 
“pretty bad,” but they are improving. She stated that she is paying her taxes and other 
debts.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 21-33, 43, 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. at 58-63. 
 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant and one of her children had medical issues that contributed to her 
financial problems. Her divorce, going on strike, and her ex-husband’s failure to pay 
child support also adversely affected her financially. Those events were beyond her 
control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 I am satisfied that the ten non-tax debts totaling about $4,260 have been paid, 
are in a payment plan, or are otherwise not of security significance. Those allegations 
are mitigated.  
 
  The crux of this case is Applicant’s failure to pay her federal income tax. The 
smallest tax lien does not appear on the two most recent credit reports. SOR ¶ 1.m is 
concluded for Applicant. The tax liens identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l are apparently 
still in effect. Applicant did little to clarify her tax situation. The only things she showed 
for certain were that she was on an installment plan; she paid $470 in October 2014; 
and the remaining balance was $36,298 in November 2014. Her other statements were 
uncorroborated by documentation and lack credibility. The Appeal Board has held that 
“it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 
2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)).  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
taxes. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are no mitigating 
conditions applicable to Applicant’s unpaid taxes.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s decades of work for a defense contractor while holding a 
security clearance. However, she has shirked her responsibility as a citizen to pay her 
taxes.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
