 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06592  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Although Applicant has been working toward the 
resolution of his delinquent debt through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, he has failed to 
demonstrate sufficient rehabilitation or reform to mitigate the financial considerations 
concerns. Also, Applicant intentionally falsified his 2012 security clearance application. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 2, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on July 28, 2015. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He responded on 
August 17, 2015, providing additional documentation. The documents appended to the 
FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 and the documents 
submitted by Applicant are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 46, was hired by a federal contractor in January 2012. He cannot work 
in the hired position unless he obtains a security clearance. Applicant served in the 
Navy from 1987 to July 2009. He held a security clearance until 2008, when his access 
to classified information was revoked. On his security clearance application submitted in 
February 2012, Applicant disclosed 23 months of unemployment between 2009 and 
2012. He also disclosed several delinquent debts as well as receiving assistance for 
financial difficulties from two credit repair services at unspecified points in time. 
Applicant did not disclose any other derogatory information. The ensuing investigation 
confirmed that Applicant is indebted to eight creditors for approximately $27,000 in 
delinquent debt. 3  
 
 Applicant blames his financial problems on three periods of unemployment from 
July 2009 to March 2010, September 2010 to February 2011, and May 2011 to January 
2012. He also cites the dissolution of his second marriage in 2003. In August 2014, 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection seeking a repayment plan for 
$76,000 in debt. He has paid over $22,000 into the plan since September 2014, 
$21,000 of which has been paid to his creditors. Of the eight debts alleged in the SOR, 
only two of the creditors (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e) have filed claims with the bankruptcy 
trustee. Applicant claims that the six other creditors did not pursue claims because he 
resolved the debts or because the creditors have no record of any delinquent balances 
attributable to him. He did not submit any evidence showing that he paid any of the 
SOR debts before filing for bankruptcy protection. Aside from general details about his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, Applicant did not provide any information about his 
current finances.4  
 
 The investigation also revealed that Applicant was convicted of driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI) in 1999. In response to the question, ‘Have you EVER been 
charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?’ Applicant indicated that he had not.  
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 3, 5-9. 
 
4 GE 2 ,4; AE B-C.  
 
 
3 
 
He offers conflicting explanations for his failure to disclose the conviction. In his March 
2012 background interview, Applicant stated that he did not report the incident on his 
security clearance application because he did not think it was reported on his arrest 
record. In response to the falsification allegation in the SOR, Applicant explained that he 
misunderstood the word ‘ever’ as used in the question.5  
 
 Applicant admits that, in 2008, his security clearance was revoked after he 
falsified a June 2006 security clearance application. He deliberately failed to disclose 
his many delinquent accounts and the 1999 DUI conviction.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 GE 2-3. 
 
6 GE 3, 8. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”7  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $27,000 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie 
case.8 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of 
not doing so.9 Applicant receives partial mitigation for his efforts to reduce his debt 
through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan because it shows a willingness to repay 
his creditors.10 However, this does not fully mitigate the financial concerns raised in the 
SOR. Only two of the eight SOR debts are being repaid in Applicant’s Chapter 13 
payment plan because those creditors filed claims with the trustee. Just because six of 
Applicant’s creditors chose not to file claims with the trustee does not mean that the 
accounts have been resolved in his favor as Applicant claims. Applicant did not provide 
any evidence indicating that he paid any of the six accounts or that the creditors have 
forgiven the debts. A creditor’s decision not to actively collect a debt does not relieve 
the Applicant of repaying debts he knowingly incurred.  
 
The record shows that Applicant has an extensive history of financial issues that 
are ongoing. Although Applicant experienced some periods of unemployment, he did 
not establish that his financial problems were entirely beyond his control or that he has 
acted responsibly in light of them. While he has received assistance from two credit 
repair services, it does not appear that these services had a positive effect on his 
finances. Ultimately, Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to support a finding 
of financial rehabilitation or reform or of positive changes to his circumstances to 
support an improvement in financial health, habits, or practices. Accordingly, financial 
considerations concerns remain. 
 
Personal Conduct 
  
 Conduct involving a lack of candor or dishonesty,  particularly, a failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security process, raises questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.11 The 
                                                          
7  AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 GE 2-6. 
 
9 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
10 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
11 AG ¶ 15. 
 
5 
 
SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose a 1999 DUI conviction on his 
June 2012 security clearance application. Proof of omission, alone, does not establish 
or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when he completed the application. 
However, the record contains sufficient circumstantial evidence of Applicant’s intent to 
falsify his security clearance application.12 His first explanation – that he believed the 
conviction was no longer being reported on his record – is most telling. It indicates that 
Applicant did not reveal the incident because he did not believe that the government 
would discover it. Applicant’s second explanation that he did not understand the 
wording of the question, specifically the use of the word ‘ever,’ is not credible. The 
language of the question is clear on its face. A reasonable person reading the same 
question would understand that disclosure of the 1999 conviction was required.  
 
 None of the personal conduct mitigating conditions applies. Applicant’s 
falsification of his 2012 security clearance application is not an isolated incident. He has 
a history of attempting to hide derogatory information from the government as shown by 
the falsification of his 2006 security clearance application. In doing so, Applicant has 
demonstrated that he does not possess the trustworthiness and reliability required of an 
individual  given access to classified information.  
 
Accordingly, doubts remain about Applicant’s security worthiness. In reaching 
this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Ultimately, 
Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and persuasion. Because the security 
concerns raised in the SOR remain, following Egan13 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.d, 1.f - 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.e:    For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
13 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
