 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09566 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted insufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
and Guideline E security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On December 15, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on November 13, 2014. 
 
In a response to the SOR, dated January 25, 2015 (SOR Response), Applicant 
admitted two of the allegations raised under Guideline F and the sole allegation raised 
under Guideline E. He also requested a determination based on the written record. On 
June 26, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that 
contained six attachments (“items”). Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on September 3, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and 
 
 
 
 
2 
submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old engineering analyst. He has worked for the same 
defense contractor since May 2000. Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree. He is 
divorced with two grown children.  
 
 Between 2000 and 2001, Applicant became involved in on-line gambling. 
Because of his gambling, he had insufficient funds to pay for all of his obligations. 
Consequently, he incurred debt. Due to a change in the law in 2001, Applicant was 
soon thereafter unable to participate in this pastime. (FORM, Item 5 at 5) As a result, he 
quit gambling.  
 
Applicant had insufficient funds to pay the $5,000 he owed on his 2005 federal 
tax return, so he chose not to file federal income taxes that year. “Each year it just 
became more of a problem, and the subject did not file his taxes through 2011.”  
(FORM, Item 5 at 5)  
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is “tight.” (FORM, Item 5 at 5) He is, 
however, meeting his current obligations. He is working on satisfying old debts. He 
started working with the Internal Revenue Service regarding his taxes in 2012. At issue 
in the SOR are the following IRS debts: 
 
1.a – 1.b – Delinquent taxes for tax year (TY) 2009 ($9,584.54) and TY 2008 ($194.28). 
Allegations denied. Applicant wrote that these have been satisfied and that evidence of 
satisfaction was attached to his SOR Response. No such documentary evidence was 
cited or otherwise identifiable. His attachment was a copy of his “last payment 
statement to the IRS,” which was also cited in the debts below concerning TY 2007 - TY 
2005. That statement specifically cites to TY 2007 - TY 2005. No mention, however, is 
made with specific regard to the status of TY 2009 – TY 2008.  
 
1.c – 1.d – Delinquent taxes for TY 2007 ($9,814.15) and TY 2006 ($9,732.68). 
Allegations admitted. In his SOR Response, Applicant wrote that these delinquent debts 
were “still being paid off, but penalties will accrue.” He provided evidence that they are 
in repayment. (FORM, Item 3, SOR Response, attachment) 
 
1.e – Delinquent tax for TY 2005 ($11,091.00). Allegation denied. Applicant commented 
that this debt “is almost paid off, See Attached document from IRS.” (FORM, Item 3, 
SOR Response, attachment) Evidence was provided showing that the debt was in 
repayment. (FORM, Item 3, SOR Response, attachment) 
 
 On March 1, 2010, Applicant executed an electronic security clearance 
application (SCA). Applicant answered “no” in response to “Section 26: Financial 
Record . . . (c) “Have you failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes, or to file a tax 
 
 
 
 
3 
return when required by law or ordinance?” He did not disclose the fact he did not file 
tax returns and pay his federal taxes for TY 2005 through TY 2009. Applicant admits 
this allegation, which is set forth at SOR allegation 2.a. He wrote that he “lied . . . 
because [he] was fearful of losing [his] job. [He] was living beyond [his] means and 
spending money [he] did not have on gambling.” He also noted that he has spent 21 
years serving this country and is loyal to this country.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
 
 
 
 
4 
for access to classified or sensitive information). To allay Applicant’s concerns, it is 
stressed that his loyalty is not an issue in this matter. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant failed to 
timely file tax returns for multiple years. This is sufficient to suggest or invoke five of the 
financial considerations as disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
AG ¶ 19(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; and 
 
 AG ¶ 19(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, “chasing losses,” . . . concealment of gambling losses, 
borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family conflict or other 
problems caused by gambling.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Applicant provided evidence that the delinquent taxes cited at SOR allegations 
1.c-1.e are in repayment. That same evidence, however, failed to be self-evident with 
regard to the debts noted at allegations 1.a-1.b. Applicant wrote that these have been 
under a repayment plan put in place with the IRS in 2012. He provided no documentary 
evidence substantiating this claim. There was no evidence of that plan. With regard to 
allegations 1.c-1.e, I find that AG ¶ 20(c) - AG ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct   
 
 AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern relating to personal conduct. It states 
that conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Here, Applicant admits he lied on his SCA. AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying. The following disqualifying 
conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
  
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or 
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve 
 
 
 
 
6 
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or 
intelligence service or other group.   
  
Applicant’s failure to timely file tax returns as outlined above indicates that he has 
questionable judgment and is unwilling to comply with rules and regulations. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e).   
  
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Applicant 
admitted that he lied on his 2010 SCA in order to keep his job. It took him until recently 
to disclose this lie. The documentary evidence offers no indication as to whether this 
type of behavior might recur. No mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old engineering analyst. He has worked for the same 
defense contractor since May 2000. Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree. He is 
divorced with two grown children. 
 
Applicant declined to timely file federal tax returns for half a decade. He showed 
that some of those tax year returns have been filed and tax obligations are in the 
process of repayment. Not all the years at issue, however, have similar documentation 
to support Applicant’s assertions.   
 
Most worrisome is Applicant’s admission that he lied on his SCA in an attempt to 
save his job. Such lies undermine the trust upon which the granting of a security 
clearance is predicated. Consequently, personal conduct security concerns remain 
unmitigated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a    Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
