 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09588 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 17, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has a history of 
financial indebtedness demonstrated by her 2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Despite having 
her delinquencies discharged through bankruptcy in the early 2000s, she incurred 15 
additional delinquent accounts between 2009 and the present time. She is now current 
on her mortgage, but 14 other delinquent accounts remain unresolved. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 27, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 24, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 16, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 
21, 2015, scheduling the hearing for August 18, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A, 
which was admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. The record 
was left open for receipt of additional documents. On August 28, 2015, Applicant 
presented AE B. Department Counsel had no objections to AE B and it was admitted. 
The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 26, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her employer for the past eight years. She is married. (Tr. 19, 23-26.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts in the 
total amount of $32,763. Her debts are identified in the credit reports entered into 
evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial delinquencies to a series of events. Applicant 
and her husband married in 2006. At that time, she owned a town house. Her husband 
wanted to move to a larger house. They found a larger home and made an offer on it. A 
week before they sale of the new home was final, her husband lost his job. They 
proceeded with the house purchase, despite the loss of his income. Her husband 
started a business.  They rented her townhome to tenants. Her husband’s business was 
not profitable and they became delinquent on their home mortgage. Their tenants 
moved out of the townhouse unexpectedly, and new tenants moved in. The new tenants 
failed to pay any rent after moving in, and Applicant had to spend time and money to 
evict them. They had $3,000 in repairs to make to the townhouse after the tenants were 
evicted. Applicant and her husband moved back into the townhouse and they are 
current on its payments. (Tr. 19-23.) 
 
 Applicant was past due on a mortgage account in the approximate amount of 
$5,553, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. She has been current on this loan since November 
2014. Her August 18, 2015 credit report reflects $0 past due on this account. Applicant 
is resolving this debt. (GE 6; Tr. 30-33.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$11,040, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant testified that this debt was for her 
husband’s truck that was repossessed. Her August 2015 credit report reflects this debt 
first became delinquent in July 2009. Applicant has not had recent contact with this 
creditor. This debt is unresolved. (GE 6; Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$2,453, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt was for a credit card. Her August 2015 credit 
report reflects this debt has been delinquent since April 2010. Applicant has not had 
recent contact with this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (GE 6; Tr. 34-35.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$2,265, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt was for a repossessed motorcycle. Her 
August 2015 credit report reflects this debt first became delinquent in May 2009. 
Applicant has not had recent contact with this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (GE 6; 
Tr. 35-36.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$1,171, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt was a store credit card that Applicant used 
to purchase Christmas presents for her children. Her August 2015 credit report reflects 
this debt first became delinquent in September 2010. Applicant has not had recent 
contact with this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$1,236, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. She admitted this allegation. Applicant failed to present 
any evidence that she is addressing this debt. It is unresolved. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $694, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. She admitted this allegation. Applicant failed to present any 
evidence that she is addressing this debt. It is unresolved. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; 
GE 5.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$11,040, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. She admitted this allegation. Applicant failed to 
present any evidence that she is addressing this debt. It is unresolved. (Answer; GE 6.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$78, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. She admitted this allegation. Applicant failed to present 
any evidence that she is addressing this debt. It is unresolved. (GE 6.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $62, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. Applicant denied this debt because it was repaid. Her August 
2015 credit report reflects the account as a charged-off account. It is unresolved. (GE 6; 
Tr. 37-38.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $68, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. She admitted this allegation. Applicant failed to present any 
evidence that she is addressing this debt. Her August 2015 credit report reflects the 
account as a charged-off account in the amount of $313. It is unresolved. (GE 6.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $341, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l. Applicant does not recognize this debt. She did not dispute it, 
but it no longer is on her credit report. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
4 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $508, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. Applicant does not recognize this debt. However, she failed to 
present any documentation showing that she researched this debt or otherwise 
contested it. (Tr. 38-40.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$2,325, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. Applicant does not recognize this debt. (Tr. 39-40.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$2,015, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o. She admitted this allegation. Applicant failed to 
present any evidence that she is addressing this debt. It is unresolved. (Answer; GE 2; 
GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in January 2000. It was the result of a 
short marriage to her ex-husband. She had placed all of the marital debts in her name 
due to his poor credit rating. When the marriage dissolved, she was left with delinquent 
accounts that she could not resolve on her single income. As a result, she filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Her debts were discharged. (GE 2; Tr. 26-29.) 
 
Applicant testified she recently purchased a $43,000 sports car. (Tr. 44.) She 
indicated that she has “been working really hard the last couple of years to catch up on 
things that I could pay and get current with [her] mortgage, and [she] knows [she] made 
some foolish decisions regarding [her] finances.” (Tr. 50.)  
 
Applicant has displayed excellent work performance and business ethics during 
the past eight years of employment with her company, as documented by her facility 
manager. She is thought to be a trustworthy, conscientious, dedicated person and 
employee by her friends and co-workers. Her performance evaluations reflect she 
exceeds expectations in most of her job duties. She has received a number of 
certificates from her employer in recognition of her good work. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness demonstrated by her 2000 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Despite having her delinquencies discharged through that 
bankruptcy in the early 2000s, she incurred 15 delinquent accounts in the total amount 
of $32,763. She has resolved her mortgage delinquency of $5,553, but the other 14 
debts remain unresolved. The evidence raises all of the above security concerns, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. She has 14 unresolved delinquent 
accounts. Despite her delinquencies, she recently purchased a new sports car. She has 
not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. AG ¶ 20(a) has not been 
established. 
 
 Applicant blamed her financial problems on a series of events beyond her 
control, including her husband’s loss of employment and tenants she had to evict from 
her townhome. However, she also accepted responsibility for poor decisions she made 
 
7 
 
like choosing to buy a larger house after her husband lost his job.  She acknowledged 
that her financial problems were not entirely beyond her control. Further, she failed to 
act responsibly to address the debts in a timely manner. She has only taken action to 
rehabilitate her townhome mortgage. The rest of her debts remain unaddressed. AG ¶ 
20(b) has not been fully established. 
 
 Applicant failed to produce documentation to show she received counseling for 
her financial problems.  There are no clear indications that her financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. Applicant recently brought her mortgage current; 
however, 14 other debts remain unresolved. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) have not been fully 
established. 
 
 Applicant testified that she denied some of her debts because she did not 
recognize those accounts. However, she failed to take any formal steps or otherwise 
document her dispute on those accounts. AG ¶ 20(e) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
respected by her colleagues and performs well at work. However, she has done little to 
address her delinquencies. Her total debt owed is less than the amount of the loan for of 
the sports car she recently purchased. She has not demonstrated reasonable or 
responsible actions with respect to her debt. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
 
8 
 
Considerations security concerns. I conclude the whole-person concept against 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
