 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-09921 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 10, 2012, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP). On March 14, 2015, the Department of Defense issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 20, 2015. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On June 2, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, was 
provided to the Applicant on June 15, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on July 15, 2015. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 
day time allowed that would have expired on August 14, 2015. I received the case 
assignment on September 1, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant is 41, divorced, and has one child. He works for a defense contractor. 
He has a college degree. (Items 2, 3) 
 
 Applicant and his former wife owned a home when they were married. They 
divorced in May 2011 and sought to sell the house. They owed $182,684 between two 
mortgages on the house to his credit union. Those mortgages are the subject of the 
SOR allegations with his credit union being owed $113,025 on the first mortgage and 
$69,659 on the second mortgage. After the divorce Applicant could not afford to pay the 
mortgages on his own. He does not state in his Answer what the monthly payment was. 
He had a short sale of the house in January 2012. (Items 1, 2) 
 
 After the sale, in March 2012, Applicant offered $5,000 from himself and his 
former wife, each, in settlement of the remaining $182,684 debt. The total was to be 
$10,000. They would each pay $75 monthly. He claimed he could not pay more than 
that amount. At that rate the payments from each would be $900 annually. It would take 
over five years to pay the $10,000. Applicant did not provide any historical financial 
information about his salary in 2012 or his assets, how much of a down payment he 
made on the house, or other relevant financial information to support his assertion that 
he could not afford to pay the credit union the money he owed them. He does not 
provide information on the sale price of the house. (Items 1, 2, 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant submitted a Response to the FORM. It consists of a letter from him to 
DOHA and a copy of a July 21, 2015 letter from his credit union about the second offer 
he made to settle the outstanding balance on the mortgages. Applicant contends that if 
the Federal government “backed” the credit union like it did banks, then he could have 
settled the loans for a minimal amount of money. The Response shows the credit union 
rejected his offer of $1,500 on the $182,684 balance. They wanted at least 25% of the 
debt repaid, which Applicant states would be $45,000, and he cannot pay it. (Response)   
 
 The credit bureau reports on Applicant from May 2012 and October 2014 show 
he owes other debts and pays them. In 2014 he purchased a $36,000 automobile and 
owed about $42,000 in student loans. He also has two credit cards listed, on which he 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
owes about $11,000. Applicant continued to spend money while he claimed he was 
unable to repay his mortgage. (Items 5, 6) 
  
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 
4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management between May 10 and May 29, 2012. Applicant did not 
adopt it as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2012 to the present, Applicant accumulated two delinquent debts, totaling 
$182,684, the balances on his first and second mortgages on his former residence. 
Both mortgages remain unpaid or unresolved after the bank conducted a short sale in 
2012 of the house.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the divorce were shown by Applicant to have a 
substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. He did not provide information on his 
income in 2012 or at the present. He did not submit documents showing the sale price 
of the house. His credit reports show he did purchase a $36,000 automobile in 2014. If 
he could afford to make the payments on that vehicle, it would seem likely he could 
make similarly sized payments on the $45,000 the credit union sought to settle his 
debts. Applicant merely asserts he cannot repay his mortgages. That is not persuasive 
proof of financial inability and that he acted responsibly under the circumstances during 
the past three years. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
purchased his marital residence. He has not taken any action since 2012 to resolve his 
mortgage debts. This inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
or duress based on the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action 
continues to this day, and is obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his 
past performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  
Next, he exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make 
payments on any of his delinquent debts during the past three years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
