1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-03356
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 4, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on September 30, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.)  On October 14, 2014, the
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) concerning Applicant. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 27, 2015 (Answer), and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on April 24, 2015. This case was assigned to me on April 30, 2015. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 11,
2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 15, 2015. The Government offered
Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant
testified on his own behalf. Applicant asked that the record remain open for the receipt
of additional documents. Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit A on June 16, 2015,
2
which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
on June 23, 2015. The record closed on June 30, 2015. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 38, and divorced with two children. He served in the Navy for 14
years, leaving active duty in 2014 with an Honorable Discharge. He is employed by a
defense contractor, and seeks to retain a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant
admitted allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e., 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, 1.r, and 1.t.
in the SOR under this Paragraph. Those admissions are findings of fact. He denied the
remaining allegations, or stated he had no knowledge of the underlying debts.
(Allegations 1.k, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, 1.s, and 1.u.) He also submitted additional information to
support his request for a security clearance.
The SOR lists 21 delinquent debts, totaling approximately $85,155. The
existence and amount of these debts is supported by credit reports dated November 5,
2013; June 13, 2014; April 24, 2015; and June 10, 2015. (Government Exhibits 2. 3. 4,
and 5.)
According to Applicant, his current financial difficulties began in 2011 and 2012.
He was divorced in 2011, and left active duty with the Navy in 2012. After the divorce he
began having to pay $1,000 a month in child support. He also found his income dropped
after he left the service. (Government Exhibit 2 at Sections 15, and 17; Tr. 19-21, 32.)  
1.a. Applicant admits that he owes a finance company for a repossessed
automobile. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $27,557. The most recent credit
report, Government Exhibit 5 at page 4, indicates that the past-due amount is $10,312.
Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make
payments on this account. (Tr. 34-35.) This debt is not resolved.
1.b. Applicant admits that he owes a finance company $11,627 for a charged-
off account. He states in his Answer that the current balance is “under $6,000.”
However, he did not support this statement with any documentary evidence. Applicant
has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make payments on
this account. (Tr. 35-36.) This debt is not resolved.
3
1.c. Applicant admits that he owes a finance company $9,229 for a charged-off
account. He states in his Answer that the current balance is “under $6,000.” However,
he did not support this statement with any documentary evidence. Applicant has made
no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make payments on this
account. (Tr. 36-38.) This debt is not resolved.
1.d. Applicant admits that he owes a finance company $6.941 for a charged-off
account. Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to
make payments on this account. (Tr. 38-40.) This debt is not resolved.
1.e. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for an account placed for
collection in the amount of $6,537. He also states that this debt is a duplicate of
allegation 1.r, which concerns a judgment on a lawsuit. The Government acknowledged
that these two allegations concern the same account. (Government Exhibit 5 at 1; Tr.
41-43.) Given the fact that a judgment supercedes this past-due account, the allegation
is found for Applicant.
1.f. Applicant admits that he owes a finance company $6,178 for a charged-off
account. Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to
make payments on this account. (Tr. 44.) This debt is not resolved.
1.g. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for an account placed for
collection in the amount of $3,056. He was unsure of the status of this debt. Applicant
has not made any payments on this debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. (Tr.
44.) It is not resolved.
1.h. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the
amount of approximately $1,787. Applicant has not made any payments on this debt
and has no current plans to pay this debt. It is not resolved.
1.i. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $1,115 for a past-due account.
Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make
payments on this account. This debt is not resolved.
1.j. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $761 for a past-due account.
Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make
payments on this account. This debt is not resolved.
1.k. Applicant states that he has no knowledge of a past-due debt to this
creditor in the amount of $731. The debt is found in two of the Government credit
reports. Applicant has not formally disputed this debt with the credit reporting services.
Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make
payments on this account. (Government Exhibits 2 and 4; Tr. 46-48.) This debt is not
resolved.
4
1.l. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $566 for a past-due account.
Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make
payments on this account. This debt is not resolved.
1.m. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $416 for a past-due account
regarding a cable bill. At the hearing, he states that he had no knowledge of the account
and further states that the cable company “have no record of this.” (Tr. 45.) Applicant
has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make payments on
this account. This debt is not resolved.
1.n. Applicant states that he has no knowledge of a past-due debt to this
creditor in the amount of $391. The debt is found in all four of the Government credit
reports. Applicant has not formally disputed this debt with the credit reporting services.
Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make
payments on this account. (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and 5; Tr. 55.) This debt is not
resolved.
1.o. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $210 for a past-due account
regarding a cable bill. At the hearing, he states that he had no knowledge of the
account. (Tr. 55.) Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no
plans to make payments on this account. This debt is not resolved.
1.p. Applicant states that he has no knowledge of a past-due debt to this
creditor in the amount of $210 for a returned check. He further states that he does not
use checks, only a debit card. The debt is found in all four of the Government credit
reports. Applicant has not formally disputed this debt with the credit reporting services.
Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans to make
payments on this account. (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and 5; Tr. 53-54.) This debt is
not resolved.
1.q. Applicant states that he has no knowledge of a past-due debt to the same
creditor as in allegation 1.p in the amount of $191 for a returned check. He further
states that he does not use checks, only a debit card. The debt is found in all four of the
Government credit reports. Applicant has not formally disputed this debt with the credit
reporting services. Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no
plans to make payments on this account. (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and 5; Tr. 53-
54.) This debt is not resolved.
1.r. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a judgment in the
amount of $4,463. He states that this is a duplicate of allegation 1.e. Applicant states
that he has not completely paid off the judgement. (Tr. 41-43.) This debt is not resolved.
1.s. Applicant states that he has no knowledge of a past-due debt to this
creditor in the amount of $699. He states that he did business with the original creditor,
but paid cash. The debt is found on one of the Government credit reports. Applicant has
not formally disputed this debt with the credit reporting services. Applicant has made no
5
recent payments on this account and has no plans to make payments on this account.
(Government Exhibit 2; Tr. 51-53.) This debt is not resolved.
1.t. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $528 for unpaid fines owed to a
government entity. At the hearing, he states that he had no knowledge of the account.
(Tr. 49-51.) Applicant has made no recent payments on this account and has no plans
to make payments on this account. This debt is not resolved.
1.u. Applicant states that he has no knowledge of a past-due debt to this
mobile telephone provider in the amount of $1,962. He states that this is his current
cable and internet company is and his account is current with them. Applicant was given
the opportunity to provide a current bill from this creditor, but he did not submit such a
bill. The debt is found on one of the Government credit reports. Applicant has not
formally disputed this debt with the credit reporting services. Applicant has made no
recent payments on this account and has no plans to make payments on this account.
(Government Exhibit 2; Tr. 48-49.) This debt is not resolved.
Regarding all of his past-due debts Applicant states that he wishes to pay them
off, but acknowledges that he has not made any recent payments on any of them. (Tr.
55-58.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted his most recent performance review. It showed that he
“Exceeds Expectations” in most categories. (Applicant Exhibit A.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
6
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
7
security concerns. Applicant has a considerable amount of debt that he has either been
unable or unwilling to pay for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(b)
states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Also, AG
¶ 20(d) states it can be mitigating where, “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” None of these mitigating
conditions apply to Applicant’s case.
Applicant=s financial difficulties have been in existence since at least 2011, if not
before. I have considered the fact of Applicant’s difficulty in adjusting to a reduced
income when he left the service, and the fact of his divorce. However, Applicant
presented no evidence to show that he has acted responsibly with regards to his
significant indebtedness. Applicant submitted no evidence to show that any of the debts
have been paid. He states that he has no knowledge of several of the debts, but has
done very little, if anything, to contest them. Given the state of the record, I cannot find
that he has acted responsibly with regard to his debts, or that he has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay or resolve them.
In conclusion, looking at Applicant’s entire financial situation at the present time,
the evidence does not support a finding that “there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control,” as is required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found
against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
8
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guideline F, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems for
several years, which have not been resolved. He has a history of not paying his debts,
and there is little evidence to show that he is now trustworthy and reliable. Applicant’s
conduct with regard to his finances was not mitigated.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent and continuing. I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also
cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); or that there is little to no likelihood of continuation or recurrence
(AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation. Accordingly, the evidence supports denying his request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
9
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
