 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )    ADP Case No. 14-05940 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a citizen of South Africa by birth, of the United Kingdom by descent, 
and of the United States by naturalization. Foreign preference concerns raised by his 
possession of South African and United Kingdom passports are mitigated by his 
surrender of those foreign passports to his facility security office for the duration of his 
employment. He has considerable ties to the United States. I am persuaded that he can 
be counted on to act in U.S. interests. Position of trust granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and explaining why it was 
unable to grant him eligibility for a public trust position. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 12, 2015, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). On April 21, 2015, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing 
to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. I delayed scheduling the hearing on request of the 
Applicant, who had a trip planned for late May 2015. On July 23, 2015, I scheduled a 
hearing for August 19, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, five Government exhibits (GEs 1-5) were admitted without 
objection. The Government also withdrew SOR 1.c of the SOR. Applicant submitted 
several documents with his Answer, which were returned to him at his hearing for 
possible submission. They were marked and entered collectively without objection as 
Applicant exhibit (AE) A. A second exhibit was entered as AE B. Applicant also testified, 
as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on August 27, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The amended SOR alleges under Guideline C, foreign preference, that Applicant 
exercises dual citizenship by possessing an active South African passport issued in 
September 2006 and valid until September 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and by possessing an 
active United Kingdom (U.K.) passport issued in May 2012 and valid until June 2022 
(SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant provided a detailed response to the SOR in which he admitted 
the allegations, but denied the inference of foreign preference. He cited several facts 
and circumstances as indicative of a clear preference for, and commitment to, the 
United States. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old native citizen of South Africa (AE A), who seeks to 
provide consulting services to a U.S. defense agency. He acquired U.K. citizenship by 
descent. His parents, both U.K. native citizens, moved to South Africa sometime after 
the birth of his older brother in 1965. Applicant’s parents registered his birth at the 
British Consulate in South Africa. (GEs 1, 2, Tr. 17.) Applicant has a younger brother as 
well. Both brothers are dual citizens of the United Kingdom and South Africa. As of April 
2014, Applicant’s mother and brothers were residing in the United Kingdom. His father 
was living in Australia. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant attended high school and college in South Africa, earning his 
bachelor’s degree in December 1990. He was conscripted into the South African 
Defense Force and served from July 1991 to June 1992, at the rank of private as a clerk 
in a personnel division. Applicant was married to his first wife, a South African native 
citizen, from December 1990 to July 1997. He purchased a condominium in South 
Africa around June 1991. He sold that condominium for $20,000 and bought a house in 
South Africa around January 1993 for $40,000. A year later, Applicant moved to another 
city in South Africa, so he sold that house and bought another for $50,000. Applicant 
voted in a general election in South Africa in April 1994, but has not otherwise exercised 
any foreign voting rights. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 20.) 
 
 3 
 In May 1998, at age 30, Applicant entered the United States on an H1-B1 
(nonimmigrant worker) work visa. (AE A; Tr. 18.) He closed his bank account and sold 
his home in South Africa when he moved to the United States. In August 1999, 
Applicant had a son, who was born in the United States. Applicant pays child support to 
his son’s mother, who is a U.S. resident citizen. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
 Applicant and his current spouse, also a native of South Africa, married in July 
2000 in South Africa. She has a son from a previous marriage, who was born in South 
Africa in September 1995. Before joining Applicant in the United States, she sold a 
condo in South Africa that she had owned since 1995. In August 2000, Applicant and 
his spouse bought their present residence in the United States. They have two children, 
who were born in the United States in August 2001 and May 2007. (GE 1; AE A.) 
 
 From May 2001 to March 2008, Applicant consulted for a U.S. company. (GE 1.) 
He renewed his employment authorization in the United States and then pursued legal 
residency. (AE A.) When he was not at a client site, he worked remotely from his home 
in the United States. (GE 1.) On June 17, 2004, Applicant was granted authorization for 
parole of an alien into the United States, which allowed him to depart from and return to 
the United States while awaiting adjudication of his immigrant application. On February 
26, 2005, Applicant was granted U.S. permanent residency. (AE A.) 
 
 In April 2008, Applicant was hired by a company close to his home. Applicant 
traveled abroad on several occasions, for approximately five days each time, to attend 
internal business meetings and workshops over the next five years. All foreign travel 
between April 2007 and September 2011 was on his South African passport, which he 
renewed on September 12, 2006, for another 10 years. (GEs 1, 2, 5; AE B.) In 
September 2011, Applicant traveled to the United Kingdom with his family to visit his 
brother and mother. (GE 2.) 
 
 On May 15, 2012, Applicant was issued a U.K. passport, which is not scheduled 
to expire until June 14, 2022. (GEs 1, 2; AE B.) Applicant has not traveled on this U.K. 
passport. (GEs 1, 2.) Applicant was a U.S. permanent resident when he acquired his 
U.K. passport. (GE 1.) He had previously used a U.K. passport, but cannot recall the 
dates or locations of travel, or even the date of issuance of the expired passport. (GE 
2.) 
 
 Applicant, his spouse, and his stepson became naturalized U.S. citizens on July 
6, 2012. (AE A; Tr. 18, 21-22.) Applicant was issued his U.S. passport on July 17, 2012. 
(GE 3.) His spouse obtained her U.S. passport on July 19, 2012. U.S. passports were 
issued for their two U.S.-born children on July 26, 2012. Applicant’s stepson acquired 
his U.S. passport on September 11, 2012. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant traveled abroad on business for his employer in August 2012, October 
2012, March 2013, and May 2013, using his U.S. passport. (GE 1; Tr. 19-20.) In May 
2013, Applicant resigned from his employment to start his own business. Since June 
2013, he has been a self-employed consultant. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
 4 
 On April 11, 2014, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Applicant was under 
contract to a consulting firm (company X) for management consulting services at a 
defense agency, and he completed the e-QIP for a position of trust. He fully disclosed 
his foreign citizenships, his possession of current U.K., U.S., and South African 
passports, his foreign travel, and the foreign citizenships of family members. He 
reported that his spouse and stepson were dual citizens of the United States and South 
Africa. (GE 1.)  
 
 On May 12, 2014, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant volunteered that he continues to 
hold South African and British citizenship for no specific reason other than historical 
related to his birth and heritage. Applicant denied the acceptance of any foreign benefits 
from South Africa or the United Kingdom, or that he maintained his foreign citizenships 
to protect any foreign financial interests. While he had voted in a South African general 
election for its presidency and the House of Representatives in April 1994, he was no 
longer eligible to vote because he does not reside in South Africa. Applicant detailed his 
military service for South Africa from July 1991 to June 1992, and indicated that he had 
no further military service obligation. Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce his 
foreign citizenships, citing his allegiance to the United States. He also expressed a 
willingness to relinquish his foreign passports because he has no need for them. (GE 1.) 
 
 As of May 19, 2015, Applicant had surrendered possession of his U.K. and South 
African passports to the “managing principal” at company X for the duration of his 
contract with the firm. (AE B; Tr. 22.) The “managing principal” serves as facility security 
officer for the company. (Tr. 22.) Applicant understands that if he asks for return of 
either or both of his foreign passports, it could have negative implications for his 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position. (Tr. 23.)  
 
 As of August 19, 2015, Applicant had taken no steps to renounce his South 
African or U.K. citizenship. His contract position could end at any time, and he did not 
want to make a decision that could possibly have an impact on his family in the future. 
(Tr. 24.) Applicant’s preference is to retain his foreign citizenships. Applicant 
surrendered possession of his foreign passports after Department Counsel explained to 
him that surrender was not synonymous with renunciation. He is willing to use his U.S. 
passport exclusively for foreign travel for as long as he holds a position of trust. (Tr. 27-
28, 31.) 
 
 Applicant’s spouse is a self-employed dance instructor. (GE 2.) She earned her 
Bachelor of Arts degree in dance education in June 2009 from a U.K. institution. As of 
April 2014, she had a scholarship for an approved program of study toward her Master 
of Arts in liberal studies from a public college in the United States. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant has developed considerable expertise as a consultant in supply chain 
management. He presented 22 character reference letters, including 19 from individuals 
 
 5 
with knowledge of his work over the years.1 Applicant is known for his technical 
knowledge, the exceptional quality of his work, his excellent communications and 
relationships with customers and team members, his leadership abilities, his creativity, 
and his trustworthiness and reliability. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with national security. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) The 
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, 
dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will apply to cases 
forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel 
Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.  
  
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to 
AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
  
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
                                                 
1 
Applicant identified 23 individuals on the list of his character references. A personal reference letter 
identified in the list was not included in the letters submitted in AE A. AE A contains two copies of the 22 
reference letters. 
 
 6 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. See Executive 
Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C—Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign preference is articulated 
in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
Applicant is a citizen of his native South Africa from birth, of the United Kingdom 
by descent, and of the United States by choice. Retention of foreign citizenship acquired 
from birth out of respect for one’s ethnic heritage, for example, is not disqualifying in the 
absence of an exercise of a right, privilege, or obligation of that citizenship. Mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in 
a foreign country,” covers his acquisition of his citizenship with South Africa and with the 
United Kingdom. As a dual citizen of South Africa and the United Kingdom, he renewed 
his South African passport in September 2006 and his U.K. passport in May 2012. 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 11(c), “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of 
foreign citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor,” applies to the renewal of his foreign passports. However, after 
Applicant acquired his U.S. citizenship and passport in July 2012, he continued to retain 
possession of current South African and U.K. passports. He has not used those foreign 
passports since his U.S. naturalization, but there is a risk of unverifiable travel as long 
as he possesses a valid foreign passport. Concerns of foreign preference are raised by 
possession of a valid foreign passport under AG ¶ 10(a)(1): 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport. 
 
When Applicant was interviewed by the OPM investigator on May 12, 2014, he 
expressed willingness to renounce his foreign citizenship because his allegiance is to 
the United States, and he resides in the United States. He also indicated that he was 
willing to relinquish his foreign passports because he did not need them. A willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship can be mitigating of the foreign preference concerns under 
AG ¶ 11(b). However, Applicant has taken no steps toward renunciation. To the 
 
 7 
contrary, his admitted preference is to retain his foreign citizenships with South Africa 
and with the United Kingdom, not knowing what the future will bring. AG ¶ 11(b) does 
not apply. 
 
To address the DOD’s concerns about his possession of valid foreign passports, 
Applicant has surrendered his foreign passports to the company sponsoring him for a 
public trust position. The delay in surrendering his foreign passports was credibly 
explained by his failure to understand that he had an alternative acceptable to the DOD 
that did not require renunciation of foreign citizenship. AG ¶ 11(e), “the passport has 
been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated,” applies in mitigation of the foreign preference concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).2 The analysis in Guideline C is incorporated in my whole-person analysis. 
However, some factors warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant’s choice to retain his South African and U.K. citizenships 
notwithstanding, he has chosen to live and pursue his own consulting business in the 
United States. Before coming to the United States on an H1-B1 visa in 1998, he 
divested himself of all foreign financial interests. He has used his expertise in supply 
chain management to benefit U.S. companies and now a defense agency. He has used 
his U.S. passport exclusively for foreign travel since his naturalization. His recent 
surrender of custody of his South African and U.K. passports ensures that any future 
travel will be on his U.S. passport for as long as he holds a position of trust, and it is 
evidence of his willingness to comply with DOD requirements. Under the whole-person 
concept, I am persuaded that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to occupy a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
                                                 
2
 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
 8 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
