1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01800 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on November 
21, 2013. On July 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 4, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on March 25, 2015. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on April 22, 2015.  
Applicant received the FORM on May 6, 2015. He had 30 days to submit a response to 
the FORM. He did not submit matters in response to the FORM. On July 30, 2015, the 
FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and was assigned to me on July 31, 2015. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
2 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 4 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. The five-page document is a summary of an 
interview of Applicant on December 19, 2013, in conjunction with his background 
investigation. DoDD 5220.6, enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received 
with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal 
Rules of Evidence.” (See ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014)). Item 
4 is not authenticated. Department Counsel noted in a footnote on page 2 of the FORM: 
 
The Government recognizes that Item 6 is objectionable under DODD 
5220.6, Paragraph 20 if the Government does not provide the interview 
agent. However, Applicant is free to waive the objection and/or make 
corrections to Item 6 if he would like his summary of interview considered. 
If Applicant does not address Item 6, the Government requests it be 
admitted.  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte. Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a 
response to the FORM is not a knowing waiver of the rule.  Waiver means “the 
voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage. The party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner, 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
While the Government attempted to explain why Applicant could object to the 
admissibility of Item 4, I cannot conclude Applicant was expressly informed of the 
requirement in ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive because it was explained in a footnote. It is not 
unusual for Applicants to forego reading footnotes in a FORM. I cannot conclude 
Applicant expressly waived this rule because he did not submit a response to the FORM 
and there is no way to conclude that Applicant was aware of the requirement in ¶ 
E3.1.20.  I find Item 4 is not admissible and will not be considered in this decision.   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 2) His admissions are incorporated into the Findings of Fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor. This 
is his first time applying for a security clearance. He is a high school graduate and has 
some college credit. He is single and has no children. (Item 3)   
 
Applicant admits to using and purchasing marijuana from 2005 to 2009 and once 
in July 2013. (Item 2) In response to section 23 on his security clearance application, 
dated November 21, 2013, he listed his marijuana use from May 2005 to September 
2009. He listed the frequency as once a year. (Item 3, section 23)   
 
3 
 
Applicant admits that he did not disclose his marijuana use in July 2013 on his 
security clearance application.  He states he did not remember the July 2013 marijuana 
use at the time of answering the security clearance application. He admits the oversight 
was inexcusable and he apologizes for the omission. (Item 2)   
 
 In his Response to the SOR, Applicant stated that between 2005 – 2009, he 
used marijuana only a few times during cookouts.  He usually only took three inhales. 
He admits he was young and irresponsible. He exercised weak character in July 2013 
by giving into peer pressure. He admits his reasons do not justify his usage, but hopes it 
shows that he “is not some type of junky.”  He has not used any illegal drugs since July 
2013 and intends to remain drug free. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant admits his illegal marijuana use was a poor reflection of his character 
and wishes he had made better decisions in the past. He believes he has made great 
improvements and believes he is a person of trust. (Item 2)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
4 
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (E.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) (any drug abuse); and 
 
AG & 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia). 
 
Applicant used marijuana on sporadic occasions from 2005 to 2009 and on one 
occasion in July 2013. AG & 25(a) and AG & 25(c) applies.  
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
5 
 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
  
AG & 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) applies because more than two years have passed since Applicant’s 
last illegal use of marijuana in July 2013. Applicant did not use marijuana on a regular 
basis. Between 2005 and 2009, he used marijuana only once a year. His last use of 
marijuana was on one occasion in July 2013.  Applicant appears to understand the 
security concern involving illegal drug use. It is unlikely that he will jeopardize his future 
by returning to illegal drug use.   
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) applies because Applicant has not used illegal drugs for over two 
years. Most of his illegal drug use occurred when he was a college student. He has 
matured and is focused on his future. While he did not provide a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation, he did express his intent 
to never use marijuana again in his response to the SOR.  Applicant met his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
   
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The following disqualifying condition potentially applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
6 
 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
  
 Applicant admits he did not list his July 2013 marijuana use in response to 
section 23 on his security clearance application.  In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
states with regard to this omission, “It’s a fact that did not dawn on me at the time of 
answering the questionnaire. It is inexcusable. I apologize for it.” (Item 2) For AG ¶ 
16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. I find Applicant did not 
deliberately omit his July 2013 marijuana use. He did not remember to list it at the time 
he completed the security clearance application. Applicant put the government on notice 
about his marijuana use when he listed his use of marijuana between 2005 and 2009. 
Once he realized the omission of his 2013 marijuana use on his security clearance 
application, he volunteered that he used marijuana in 2013 and apologized for the 
oversight.   
   
 Even if Applicant’s omission was considered deliberate, the mitigating condition 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) applies. Applicant fully disclosed his marijuana use to the Government. He 
has not used marijuana in over two years. Applicant does not intend to use marijuana in 
the future. Applicant’s full disclosure of his marijuana use, all of which occurred in his 
twenties before he applied for a security clearance does not raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. The Personal Conduct concern is found 
for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered Applicant disclosed his 
illegal marijuana use on his security clearance application and later volunteered his July 
2013 illegal marijuana use, which he forgot about at the time he completed the security 
clearance application. More than two years have passed since Applicant’s last use of 
marijuana.  He does not intend to use illegal drugs again. His failure to list his use of 
marijuana in July 2013 was an oversight.  Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
raised under Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct.     
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2 Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
