KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge made findings about Applicant’s evidence.  Applicant’s argument is not
enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence.  Nor is Applicant’s
alternative interpretation of the evidence enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in
an  arbitrary and capricious manner.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03450.a1
DATE: 09/11/2015
DATE: September 11, 2015
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03450
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
1 See Item 2, SCA, dated July 30, 2013, at 33.
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 2, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On June 29, 2015, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert J. Tuider denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  He has been so employed since 2004 and has held
a clearance since late 2006.  In his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed that
he had taken a puff from a marijuana cigarette while at a friend’s house, inhaling the smoke.
Applicant stated that he is neither a regular nor a recreational user of marijuana, characterizing this
incident as “more of a joke than anything.”  Decision at 2.  At the time of this use, Applicant held
a security clearance.  There is no evidence that Applicant disclosed this infraction to his employer
or that his employer was otherwise aware of it.  In his SCA, he stated that he had smoked marijuana
“only a handful of times since I first experimented in my teens.”1  Id.  
Applicant had previously completed an SCA in 2005.  In doing so, he disclosed having used
marijuana three times between August and September of 1997.  In his interview, he stated that he
had used marijuana “a handful of times” since approximately 1996.  Id. at 2-3.  In his answer to the
SOR, Applicant expressed remorse for his conduct, stating that he had no intention of using drugs
in the future and recognizing the implications that such behavior has for his employment.  Applicant
emphasized the relative infrequency of his drug use, noting that his most recent instance occurred
21 months before his SOR answer.  In his response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a signed
statement of intent not to use drugs in the future, with automatic revocation of his clearance should
he fail to keep this promise.  There is no evidence of a current drug assessment.
Applicant’s supervisor provided a statement.  He advised that Applicant has received high
ratings for the quality of his work, having been promoted three times in less than ten years.  He
stated that Applicant has received 23 awards for outstanding performance and is highly regarded by
senior management.  The Judge also noted evidence that Applicant had disclosed to his employer
a 2005 incident of DUI, at a time when he did not hold a clearance.  The Judge stated that he had
not considered Applicant’s DUI in arriving at his decision in this case.
2In his SOR answer, Applicant stated the following: “Although I have zero intent to use any drug in the future,
I realize this means I should still dissociate with any friends, associates, or contacts [who do so].” (emphasis added) The
Judge appears to have interpreted this as a promise for future action rather than evidence of steps already undertaken.
3
The Judge’s Analysis
In concluding that Applicant had not met mitigated the concerns raised by his marijuana use,
the Judge stated that, at the time he did so in 2013, Applicant was aware of the Government’s
position on using drugs while holding a clearance.  He concluded that this incident raised serious
questions about Applicant’s ability to exercise good judgment.  He also stated that the record is
unclear about Applicant’s willingness to dissociate from those who use drugs.2  The Judge noted that
Applicant’s  use of marijuana in 2013 occurred after a ten-year abstention, thereby diminishing the
mitigating effect of the 21 months that had elapsed since the 2013 use.  Though acknowledging
Applicant’s good work record, he concluded that Applicant’s presentation amounted essentially to
statements of remorse, with little to corroborate his claims of rehabilitation.
Discussion
Applicant cites to his answer to the SOR and to other evidence in the record, such as his
having disclosed his 2013 drug use on his own, the infrequency of his misconduct, his intent to
dissociate from those who use drugs, his having disclosed his 2005 DUI, etc.  He also argues that
he has been honest and cooperative during the processing of his clearance application.  
The Judge made findings about the evidence that Applicant had submitted, discussing much
of it in the Analysis.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul.
28, 2014).  Applicant has presented an alternative interpretation of the evidence, which is not enough
to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00173 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2014).  
 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  Drug use after completing an SCA raises a
substantial question about an applicant’s judgment and reliability.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-1110
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2013); ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
