 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05745 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns arising from 
his foreign contacts in the People’s Republic of China (PRC or China), a country that is 
ruled by an authoritarian communist government that aggressively conducts espionage 
against the United States. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. DOD CAF took that action under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 30, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based 
on the administrative record without a hearing. On June 30, 2015, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents identified as 
 
2 
 
Items 1 through 3. Applicant was sent a copy of the FORM and given 30 days from its 
receipt to submit objections and supply additional information. On July 24, 2015, he 
submitted a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2015. 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant’s mother, brother, three sisters, and mother-in-
law are citizens and residents of the PRC (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c); In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted each allegation. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact.1  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old senior research fellow who works for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for that contractor since March 2014. He also has been 
working as an associate professor at a university since September 2012. He was born 
in the PRC. He earned a bachelor’s degree, master’s degree, and doctorate degree 
from PRC universities as well and a doctorate degree from a U.S. university. He entered 
the United States in January 1995 and became a U.S. citizen in March 2007. He 
married in September 1991. His wife was born in the PRC and is now a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. He has four children, ages 6, 14, 17, and 21. His oldest child was born in the 
PRC and the three younger children were born in the United States. All of his children 
are U.S. citizens. This is the first time that he has applied for a security clearance.2 
 
In his Response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that his three sisters and 
brother are farmers, and his mother and mother-in-law are elderly (“over seventy-six-
year-old seniors”). He stated all of them live in remote areas and none work for the 
government or in technology-related fields. He believes there is no reason why they 
would be subjected to coercion or exploitation because of his teaching and research.3 
 
In his Response to the FORM, Applicant provided an abstract concerning a 
research program in which he participated. During that program, he was involved in the 
development of advanced materials to meet U.S. Navy requirements.4 
 
In his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant reported that he traveled to 
China to visit family members for 11 to 20 days in August 2007. He also reported that 
he had been in quarterly telephone contact with his brother and two sisters and annual 
telephone contact with his remaining sister. He listed “homemaker” or “housewife” for 
the occupations of his sisters. He reported having telephone contact with his mother-in-
law the month before he submitted his SCA. In Sections 19, 20A, and 20B of his SCA, 
he reported no foreign interests, contacts, or activities.5 
                                                          
1 Item 1. 
2 Item 2. 
3 Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
4 Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
5 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
The PRC has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party whose members hold almost all top government, police, and military 
positions. The PRC has a poor human rights record that includes repression of freedom 
of speech, religion, and association; extrajudicial killings; prolonged illegal detentions at 
unofficial holding facilities, and a lack of due process in judicial proceedings. The PRC 
may at times place foreign visitors under surveillance and has been known to monitor 
hotel rooms, offices, taxis, and communication devices, such as telephones, telefaxes, 
and internet servers.6 
 
 In 2009, the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission reported to 
Congress that, “China is the most aggressive country conducting espionage against the 
United States, focusing on obtaining information and technologies beneficial to China’s 
military modernization and economic development.” The Chinese government 
encourages and rewards private individuals who obtain technology on its behalf. In 
2011, the National Counterintelligence Executive found that “China’s intelligence 
services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit 
Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider access to 
corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail.” Agents 
of the Chinese government have offered financial inducements to U.S. government 
officials to encourage them to compromise classified information. Strong evidence also 
has emerged that the Chinese government is directing and executing a large-scale 
cyber espionage campaign against the United States.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
6 Item 3. 
7 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
5 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;   
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Under Guideline B, a security concern exists when an individual has foreign 
family members or other foreign contacts that may be manipulated to help a foreign 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests. In such situations, common sense 
suggests that the stronger the ties of affection or obligation are to a foreign contact, the 
more vulnerable a person is to being influenced if the foreign contact is brought under 
control or used by a foreign intelligence or security service.  
 
Here, Applicant has close and ongoing family ties in the PRC with his mother, 
brother, three sisters, and mother-in-law. The Appeal Board has noted that “[t]here is a 
rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interests are 
adverse to the United States and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect and 
safeguard classified information.8 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise this disqualifying conditions is a relatively low 
standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having family members living under a foreign government. Specifically, the nature of a 
foreign government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant factors in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s foreign contacts are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a foreign 
contact is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. Because the PRC has an 
authoritarian government that aggressively conducts espionage against the United 
States, Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Three are potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 03-21434 (App. Bd. Feb 20, 2007). 
 
6 
 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 This case presents unanswered questions. For example, it is unknown whether 
Applicant’s mother and mother-in-law receive government pensions and are dependent 
on the government. It is unknown whether his brother is married and, if so, what is his 
spouse’s occupation. The same question applies to the spouses of his sisters who are 
listed as either “homemaker” or “housewife” on his SCA.  
  
Applicant lived in the PRC until he was about 29 years old. He has resided in the 
United States for the last 20 years. He became a U.S. citizen eight years ago. His wife 
and children are U.S. citizens. Nonetheless, his contacts with close family members in 
China are not minimal, infrequent, or casual. The PRC’s large-scale and sophisticated 
intelligence collection efforts against the United States represent a substantial threat to 
our national security. Given the PRC’s intelligence operations against the United States, 
Applicant’s family members who reside in China are in a position where there is a 
potential for them to be exploited in a way that could force Applicant to choose between 
loyalty to those individuals and the interests of the United States. While these are 
circumstances beyond Applicant’s control, they raise security concerns under Guideline 
B that have not been mitigated. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I 
considered Applicant’s work history and professional skills. He is a well-educated, 
productive U.S. citizen. Although I have decided this case against Applicant, this 
decision should not be construed as a reflection of his loyalty or patriotism to the U.S., 
as those matters are not at issue. Instead, the “clearly consistent with national interest” 
standard is a demanding benchmark that requires resolution of any doubt against 
Applicant. His close family ties in the PRC, an authoritarian state controlled by the 
Chinese Communist Party that is aggressively involved in espionage against the United 
States, create such doubt. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Considering 
all the evidence, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                 
  
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
