1
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-05458
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant:
William Pannier, Esquire
Holland & Knight LLP
September 28, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on March 31, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On December 5, 2014, the
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct)
concerning Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 19, 2015 (Answer), and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on February 23, 2015. This case was assigned to me on March 2, 2015. The
2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March
30, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 7, 2015. The Government
offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf, called one additional witness, and submitted
Applicant Exhibits A through P, which were also admitted without objection. Applicant
asked that the record remain open for the receipt of additional documents. Applicant
submitted Applicant Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 9 on May 28, 2015, which were
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 18,
2015. The record closed on May 29, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 56, divorced, and has two children. He is employed by a defense
contractor and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant
admitted allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.p in the
SOR under this Paragraph. Those admissions are findings of fact. Applicant denied
allegations 1.e, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.q. He also submitted additional evidence to support his
continued holding of a security clearance.
Applicant has worked for several different defense contractors at the same job
location, in the same responsible position, for approximately 25 years. From 1999 to the
end of 2011, Applicant’s closely-held Subchapter S corporation was the primary
contractor. Applicant was the President, Chief Executive Officer, and Facility Security
Officer (FSO) of the corporation. His then-wife was Chief Financial Officer (CFO). In
2007 she filed for divorce from Applicant, and also resigned as CFO on the same day.
He submits that most of his financial problems stem from his work as a Federal
contractor, as well as his divorce, as further described below. Since January 2012 he
has worked for the corporation that took over the contract. (Government Exhibit 1 at
Sections 13A, 17; Tr. 53-60, 74.) 
The SOR lists fifteen delinquent debts, which include delinquent taxes for the
2009 tax year (allegation 1.p). The existence and amount of these debts is supported by
credit reports dated April 3, 2014; October 1, 2014; February 22, 2015; and June 6,
2015. (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and 5.) The debts totaled $79,801. The current
status of the debts is as follows:
1.a. Applicant admitted owing this past-due debt to a bank in the amount of
$31,829. He stated that this was a line of credit for his company. Applicant stated
concerning this debt, “It’s what’s left over on my government contract to close out. And,
Applicant states that he has to perform an internal audit of the approved delivery orders to make sure he is1
requesting the right amount for payment. He submitted a voucher for one of his delivery orders. It shows that
the last communication sent by Defense Contact Audit Agency (DCAA) was in January 2014. He further stated
that the approval letter from DCAA concerning the final year his company was in business was received in
March 2014. Applicant has not yet completed his internal audits, which are necessary for him to be paid. He
states, “I have got a lot of the initial paperwork. It’s all started. But have I finalized, am I comfortable with
saying you need to add this money to the account to pay it? I’m not comfortable with those numbers just yet.
They’re in process.” (Tr. 131-134; Applicant Post-Hearing Exhibits 1, 6.)
3
frankly, I just don’t have the means to close it.” He further stated that the reason he
cannot pay any money on this debt is because he has, “Twelve open delivery orders still
existing on my contract that ended at the end of 2011.” Applicant believes that the
Government owes him approximately $85,000 on the open orders.  Finally, Applicant1
understands that he is personally responsible for this debt because of the nature of his
corporation. (Tr. 65-68, 128-131; Post-Hearing Exhibit 5 at 1.) It is not resolved.
1.b. Applicant admitted owing this charged-off credit card debt in the amount of
$17,897. This debt has been delinquent since his divorce. He stated that he has made
an arrangement with the collector on this account. Bank records submitted by Applicant
show that he paid $1,000 on this account on May 1. 2015. He stated after the hearing
that he had paid an additional amount to this creditor. (Tr. 68-72, 134-136; Applicant
Exhibit N; Applicant Post-Hearing Exhibit 7.) This debt is not yet resolved.
1.c. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt to a bank in the amount of
$15,830. According to Applicant this debt was taken out by his wife without his
knowledge when she was CFO of the corporation. However, the debt is in the name of
his corporation, no evidence was submitted showing that his ex-wife entered into the
arrangement, and Applicant admitted that he is personally responsible for the debt. As
stated under 1.a, above, Applicant is waiting to get his delivery orders paid by the
Government so that he can pay off this debt as well. (Tr. 72-75, 136-139; Applicant
Post-Hearing Exhibit 5.) This debt is not resolved.
1.d. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the amount of
$2,116. This debt, as well as those set forth in allegations 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k, were
all owed to the same collection agency. The accounts were consolidated and Applicant
paid them off in May 2015. (Tr. 77-81; Applicant Exhibits J, K, N; Applicant Post-Hearing
Exhibit 5.) This debt is resolved.
1.e. Applicant denied owing this past-due credit card debt in the amount of
$1,101. He made a payment arrangement with the credit card holder and paid the debt.
(Tr. 81-87; Applicant Exhibits L, O.) This debt is resolved.
1.f. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the approximate
amount of $415. This debt, as well as those set forth in allegations 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and
1.k, were all owed to the same collection agency. The accounts were consolidated and
Applicant paid them off in May 2015. (Tr. 77-81; Applicant Exhibits J, K, N; Applicant
Post-Hearing Exhibit 5.) This debt is resolved.
4
1.g. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the approximate
amount of $374. This debt, as well as those set forth in allegations 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.j, and
1.k, were all owed to the same collection agency. The accounts were consolidated and
Applicant paid them off in May 2015. (Tr. 77-81; Applicant Exhibits J, K, N; Applicant
Post-Hearing Exhibit 5.) This debt is resolved.
1.h. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the approximate
amount of $236. This debt, as well as those set forth in allegations 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, and
1.k, were all owed to the same collection agency. The accounts were consolidated and
Applicant paid them off in May 2015. (Tr. 77-81; Applicant Exhibits J, K, N; Applicant
Post-Hearing Exhibit 5.) This debt is resolved.
1.i. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the approximate
amount of $159. He stated in his Answer that this debt was paid directly to the affected
hospital. At the hearing he was very confused about the status of this debt. (Tr. 88-93.)
In Applicant Post-Hearing Exhibit 1 he states that this debt was paid in full and refers to
a “Statement 3,” which does not correspond to any exhibit in the record. Based on all
available information, I find that this debt is not resolved.
1.j. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the approximate
amount of $115. This debt, as well as those set forth in allegations 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and
1.k, were all owed to the same collection agency. The accounts were consolidated and
Applicant paid them off in May 2015. (Tr. 77-81; Applicant Exhibits J, K, N; Applicant
Post-Hearing Exhibit 5.) This debt is resolved.
1.k. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the approximate
amount of $80. This debt, as well as those set forth in allegations 1.d, 1.f 1.g, 1.h, and
1.j, were all owed to the same collection agency. The accounts were consolidated and
Applicant paid them off in May 2015. (Tr. 77-81; Applicant Exhibits J, K, N; Applicant
Post-Hearing Exhibit 5.) This debt is resolved.
1.l. Applicant denied owing this past-due medical debt in the amount of $97.
Applicant paid this debt in full in January 2015. (Tr. 94-95; Applicant Exhibit M.) This
debt is resolved.
1.m. Applicant denied owing this past-due medical debt in the amount of $183.
Applicant paid this debt in full in January 2015. (Tr. 95-96; Applicant Exhibit M.) This
debt is resolved.
1.n. Applicant admitted owing this past-due medical debt in the amount of
$369. Applicant paid this debt in full in May 2015. (Tr. 96-97; Applicants Exhibit M and
N.) This debt is resolved.
1.o. Applicant admitted that he had not filed his 2012 and 2013 Federal and
state tax returns in a timely fashion. The tax returns for those two years were eventually
filed in January 2015. Applicant admits that he was remiss in not filing his tax returns for
those two years, stating several times that he was too “busy” to get them done. (Tr. 97-
The 2011 Federal and state tax returns for Applicant’s Subchapter S business were not filed until July 2013.2
(Applicant Exhibit E.) 
As of the date he signed the subject e-QIP (March 31, 2014) the 2013 tax return was not delinquent.3
5
102; Applicant Exhibits F, G.) His 2014 Federal and state tax returns were filed in a
timely fashion. (Applicant Post-Hearing Exhibit 3.)2
1.p. Applicant admitted that he owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
$9,000 for tax year 2009. This debt has been paid through a combination of direct
payments from Applicant, as well as the IRS applying his refunds from his 2012 and
2013 tax returns to the arrearage. This debt was resolved on May 18, 2015. (Tr. 102-
105, 145; Applicant Exhibit P; Applicant Post-Hearing Exhibit 9.)
1.q. Applicant denied that he was being garnished by his state taxing authority
for back taxes. According to Applicant, this was due to the state’s estimating his 2011
taxes. As noted in footnote 2, those taxes were not filed until July 2013, which was late.
Applicant’s tax returns indicate that no taxes were due for that tax year. I further note
that the Applicant’s 2012, 2013, and 2014 state tax returns indicate that he will receive a
total of $13,652 in refunds. (Tr. 106-107; Answer.) Based on all of the available
information, this debt has been resolved.
Applicant submitted no evidence that he has received any financial counseling.
He also did not submit a personal financial statement or other budgetary information,
from which his future solvency could be predicted with any confidence.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has made false statements to the Department of Defense during
the clearance screening process.
Applicant signed and certified his e-QIP seeking to continue his security
clearance on March 31, 2014. Section 26 of the questionnaire is entitled, “Financial
Record.” Under the subhead, “Taxes,” Applicant stated that he failed to pay his 2009
taxes, as discussed under 1.p, above. (Emphasis in original.) 
The questionnaire goes on to ask under the subhead, “Taxes - Summary, Are
there any other instances in the past seven (7) years where you failed to file or pay
Federal, state or other taxes when required by law or ordinance.” (Emphasis in original.)
Applicant answered, “No.” This was a false answer, as Applicant had not filed his 2012
Federal and state tax returns in a timely fashion.  3
Applicant admits intentionally answering that question “No,” but denied he did it
with the intent to deceive the Government. He testified, “When I filled out the e-QIP I
had the intention of filing both the years [2012 and 2013], especially because I knew I
had money coming back that would pay down some of the debt that I was carrying. I
6
just really frankly I just never got around to it. And remiss on my part. But I did have
good intentions of doing it right there and I just didn’t.” His testimony indicates that he
did not view his answer as false since his intent was to file the 2012 tax return promptly.
However, as he testified, he got busy and the return did not get filed until January 2015.
(Tr. 99, 115-121, 144, 150-151.) Applicant had an obligation to tell the Government the
true extent of his tax situation and he intentionally did not do so.
Section 26 of the questionnaire also includes a section entitled, “Delinquency
Involving Routine Accounts.” That section asks:
Other than previously listed, have any of the following happened? In the
past seven (7) years, have you had any possessions or property
voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed? . . . defaulted on
any type of loan? . . .  had bills or debts turned over to a collection
agency? . . . had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? . . . been over 120 days delinquent
on any debt? . . . [or] are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt?”
(Emphasis in original.)  
Applicant stated, “No,” to all of these questions. That was not true, as set forth in
detail under Paragraph 1, above.
Applicant argues that he did not intend to mislead the Government regarding his
answers on the questionnaire. He states in his Answer, “In my haste to complete the e-
QIP . . . I failed to provide all of the information requested, and also did not realize all of
the contents contained in my credit report.” There is also some indication that Applicant
was confused about whether the debts set forth under allegations 1.a and 1.c were
actually his debts, since they were technically corporate debts. (Tr. 68.)
Applicant’s argument is undercut by several points. First, Applicant argues that
he was financially naive and unaware, depending on his ex-wife to handle the personal
and corporate finances. That was true up to the date of the divorce in 2007. His
company lasted four more years, and he obviously was handling the finances of his
company by himself for that time. Even assuming he did not know that his corporate
debts were personally guaranteed, and needed to be listed, there were well over
$30,000 in personal, credit card, and medical debts that he knew, or should have
known, existed. With regard to those non-corporate SOR debts, it is not believable that
Applicant simply forgot about them. His claims of confusion and ignorance are not
credible considering that he was the CEO and FSO of his own corporation for eleven
years, and testified that he took pride in his handling of security procedures. (Tr. 122.) 
Given the state of the evidence, Applicant’s financial situation was precarious
and he knew, or should have known, the extent of his problems. Applicant has simply
not presented enough evidence to show that the alleged falsifications were the result of
innocent error. Therefore, under the circumstances, I find that they were intentional.
7
Mitigation
Applicant’s employer testified on his behalf. He is the President and CEO of the
corporation holding the contract Applicant works on. The witness realizes that Applicant
made a mistake with regard to the answers on the e-QIP, and the state of his finances.
The witness stated, “I believe that he [Applicant] is an honest person and he made
some errors in judgment, didn’t take some of the things like he should have in a serious
way. But I believe that overall he is a strong net value, a positive influence with the
Government on this program and it’s best that he retain his clearance.” (Tr. 13-33.) (See
Applicant Exhibit A.)
A personal friend and two work associates of Applicant submitted written
recommendations on his behalf. They state that Applicant is acknowledged to be an
expert in his field, as well as a person who is reliable and trustworthy. (Applicant
Exhibits C, D, and I.) Applicant received a Letter of Commendation from the armed
service Program Executive Officer in 2012 congratulating him for his then 22 years of
service. (Applicant Exhibit H.) 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
8
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant had over $79,000 in past-due consumer and personally-
guaranteed corporate debts. All of them had been due and owing for several years. The
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
9
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(c) says it can be mitigating where “the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” Finally, AG ¶ 20(d) states it can
be mitigating where, “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” None of these conditions apply to Applicant’s
case.
Applicant’s financial difficulties have been long-standing. Many of the debts date
from when his corporation was in business, including his personal and medical debts. It
is only during the past year that he has even begun to try to take control of his finances.
The two personally guaranteed corporate debts total over $47,000 and he has no idea
when he may pay them. I have considered the fact that the Government appears to owe
Applicant sufficient money to pay them off. However, as set forth in footnote 1, Applicant
has not completed his internal audits, which are necessary for him to be paid. This is
just more evidence of the procrastination and poor judgment Applicant has shown with
regard to his personal finances. He has had seven years since his divorce to take
control of his finances, and he submitted little evidence that he has done so, or intends
to do so. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant knowingly and purposely falsified his security clearance application on
March 31, 2014. He alleges that his failure to list his delinquent taxes and other financial
10
difficulties was due to oversight, and not an intentional act. However, the fact remains
that for years he has had financial difficulties. It simply strains credulity for Applicant to
claim to have forgotten the facts of his very bad financial situation when filling out his e-
QIP. 
I have reviewed the mitigating conditions and find none of them apply to the facts
of this case. In particular, I have examined the span of time, less than two years, since
the falsifications. There is insufficient evidence that Applicant currently shows good
judgment or is trustworthy and reliable. Paragraph 2 is found against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guidelines F and E, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems
for several years, which he has not resolved. In addition, Applicant failed to show that
the false denials and omissions of relevant and material information from his e-QIP
were accidental and not intentional.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent. I cannot find that there have been
permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also cannot find that
there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8));
or that there is a low likelihood of continuation or recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his current
financial situation and falsifications to the Government. Accordingly, the evidence
supports denying his request for a security clearance.
11
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
