 
 
 
 
1 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-03886 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Ray T Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
trustworthiness concerns. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) regarding her eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Applicant 
timely responded to the SOR on September 16, 2014, and requested a determination 
based on the written record.  
 
On May 14, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
with nine attachments. Applicant responded to the FORM with a packet of documents. 
The case was assigned to me on September 3, 2015. Based on my review of the file 
and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.    
 
 
 
 
2 
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old specialist working for a defense contractor. She has 
earned a bachelor’s degree. She is married with two children. Applicant was 
unemployed from August 2005 to December 2005 and from December 2012 to 
February 2013. At issue in the SOR are 11 delinquent debts and a bankruptcy.  
 
 Applicant has had delinquent debt issues since before 2010, when she filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She was discharged from her debts later that year. Since that 
time, she has acquired between $130,000 and $132,858 in new delinquent debt. This 
includes student loan-related debt. Applicant denied the debts at 1.e, 1g, and 1.i ($249, 
$109, and $53,140, respectively). She denies the first two debts, noting that she has not 
been contacted by those creditors. Her denial of the third debt appears to be based on 
two payments she made on a student loan, in June 2014 ($178) and July 2014 ($178), 
respectively. She failed, however, to provide evidence of other payments or shown that 
the account had been resolved or in rehabilitation. Her only other evidence of debt 
payment is a $25 receipt from a medical provider. A bill from a telecommunications 
provider with a handwritten notation of “$50” fails to prove such a payment was made.  
 
Although Applicant received financial counseling, she failed to show how or if she 
benefitted from it. She claims that her delinquent debts are related to her periods of 
unemployment, lack of sufficient income, and surgeries. However, there is no 
documentation supporting these claims, showing her problems were beyond her control, 
or demonstrating that she acted responsibly regarding her debts. There is no evidence 
any debts were disputed with a creditor or a credit reporting agency. Her credit reports 
show her delinquent debts include accounts which reflect no activity for several years. 
 
At work, Applicant is highly valued as an employee. She has received multiple 
certificates and awards. Her personal and professional references are positive.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a position of trust, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.”  
 
A person who seeks a public trust position enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides 
that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth the applicable trustworthiness concern: 
failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had 
earlier debts discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2010. It also showed she is 
presently delinquent on multiple accounts, amounting to approximately $132,858 in 
delinquent debt. Such facts raise financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these financial concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Multiple delinquent debts remain unpaid. Applicant attributes many of her 
delinquent debts to her periods of unemployment. Given the fact Applicant’s previous 
delinquent debts were discharged in bankruptcy in 2010, it may be assumed the period 
of unemployment to which she attributes her present delinquent debts was from 
December 2012 to February 2013. Insufficient facts, however, were presented to link 
her debts with that or any breaks in employment. Insufficient facts also undermine an 
analysis of whether her behavior and conduct at the time were reasonable.  
 
Moreover, there is no evidence any medical care received was on an emergency 
basis. There is evidence of financial counseling, but no indication she benefitted from it 
or that progress is being made on her debts. No documentation was submitted that any 
of her debts are formally in dispute. With the exception of evidence that two payments 
of $178 were paid last year, presumably to her student loan lender, and $25 was paid 
on a medical account this year, there is no evidence of progress on the debts at issue. 
In light of these facts, as based on the scant record evidence, none of the financial 
considerations mitigating considerations apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position of trust must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  
       
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old specialist working for a defense contractor. She has 
earned a bachelor’s degree. She was unemployed from August 2005 to December 
 
 
 
 
5 
2005, before her 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, and from December 2012 
through February 2013. She is married with two children. Although filing for bankruptcy 
is a legitimate method for addressing debt, it highlights Applicant’s history of financial 
difficulty and her recent acquisition of $132,858 in delinquent debt. 
 
In this case, Applicant relied on the scant written record. As noted in the analysis 
above, Applicant presented vague information regarding her acquisition of these debts 
and virtually no evidence demonstrating how she handled her debts at the time. 
Evidence of only two payments of $178 each toward what she wrote was for her student 
loans, and a recent $25 medical payment, were submitted. Her documentary evidence 
failed to give rise to any of the available financial considerations mitigating conditions.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all debts at issue. It does, 
however, expect that an applicant articulate a workable plan to address their delinquent 
debts, show that their plan has been successfully implemented, and document that their 
financial outlook has improved. Here, Applicant provided insufficient documentary 
evidence to establish that progress is being made on her delinquent debts. Lacking 
such proof, the financial considerations concerns remain.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l    For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to permit Applicant to maintain a public trust 
position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
