 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-04044 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s accumulation of over $15,000 in delinquent debt raises concerns 
about his continued eligibility for access to classified information. He failed to present 
evidence of having taken responsible action to address his past-due debts. He also 
failed to establish that his finances are under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On February 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.1 On February 26, 2015, Applicant answered the 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
SOR and requested a hearing to establish his continued eligibility for access to 
classified information. (Answer) 
 
 On May 12, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. Applicant’s hearing was scheduled, with the 
agreement of the parties, for July 23, 2015.2 The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 3 in their 
case-in-chief. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – B. These 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel offered Gx. 
4 in rebuttal, but it was not admitted into evidence because it was cumulative with other 
evidence already admitted. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on July 30, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, currently single, has three adult children and a grandchild that he 
financially supports. He is a high school graduate and has attended college, but has not 
received a college degree. He is a federal contractor and has been with his current 
employer since 1998. He earns between $75,000 and $80,000 annually from his 
primary job. He also has a part-time job from which he earns about $10,000 yearly. He 
testified that, after paying his recurring monthly expenses, he has about $1,500 in 
discretionary monthly income to pay debts and unexpected expenses. He has held a 
security clearance since about 2008. (Tr. at 25-29, 50-51; Gx. 1)  
 
Applicant admits 11 of the 13 SOR debts. These 11 delinquent debts together 
total over $15,000. The 11 admitted SOR debts range in amounts from a $55 collection 
account (1.m) to a 2009 judgment for $13,000 (1.h). Applicant has not satisfied any of 
the admitted SOR debts. He contacted some of his overdue creditors shortly before the 
hearing and purportedly made arrangements to satisfy some of his past-due debts, but 
did not submit documentation to corroborate his claims. (Tr. at 33-36)3 
 
The largest SOR debt is for a $13,000 judgment arising from a car accident. 
Applicant did not have car insurance at the time of the accident, and ignored 
summonses and court notices regarding the legal proceedings that eventually led to the 
issuance of the judgment in 2009. He either agreed or was ordered to pay $125 per 
month until the judgment was satisfied, but stopped making the required monthly 
payments in 2014. He could not explain why he stopped making the required monthly 
payments. The 2009 judgment remains unsatisfied. (Tr. at 36-43) 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I (prehearing correspondence and scheduling order).  
 
3 Applicant denies SOR debts 1.g (the original amount owed for the 2009 judgment) and 1.l (a $118 music 
club collection account that is also listed at 1.k). Although Applicant did not present documentation to 
substantiate his testimony, his explanation is credible, reasonable, and consistent with the other record 
evidence. Accordingly, SOR 1.g and 1.l are decided in his favor. However, Applicant’s testimony disputing 
the debt alleged in SOR 1.a. is contradicted by the record evidence. Compare, Tr. at 48-49, with, Gx. 2 – 
3. Furthermore, Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer and, thus, bore the burden of presenting 
evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate the debt. He failed to do so.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant readily admits that he has a poor track record in repaying his past-due 
debts. For instance, he testified that he owed back taxes for 2008 through 2012 and did 
not follow through with an IRS repayment agreement. He testified that he satisfied his 
past-due federal taxes when his tax refunds were intercepted by the IRS. (Tr. at 52-56) 
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence of receiving financial counseling. 
He claims to have read books to improve his financial situation. (Tr. at 45) He could not 
explain why with such a significant amount of discretionary monthly income he had not 
resolved any of his past-due debts. (Tr. at 50-51)  
 
Applicant presented documentation that his mother passed away in 2010, and he 
was appointed to administer her estate. (Ax. A – B) None of the SOR debts relate to his 
mother’s death or the administration of her estate.  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in January 2013. He 
disclosed on his SCA the 2009 judgment, as well as a $10,000 delinquent debt resulting 
from the repossession of his car. He satisfied the deficiency balance owed for the 
repossessed car through wage garnishment. (Gx. 1 at 27-28). Applicant stated in his 
application that he had no one to blame but himself for his poor financial situation. He 
went on to state: “I am on the road to financial freedom, so I am working on my 
delinquencies.” (Gx. 1 at 30). He has not resolved any of the 11 admitted SOR debts, to 
include the $55 collection account (SOR 1.m). At hearing, Applicant promised to change 
the manner in which he handles his finances going forward. (Tr. at 51) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
 
4 
 
 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Thus, the financial considerations security “concern is broader than the possibility that 
an applicant might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money 
in satisfaction of his or her debts.”5 The concern also encompasses financial 
irresponsibility, which may indicate that an applicant would also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
                                                          
4 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. 
Bd. June 26, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s accumulation of over $15,000 in delinquent debt raises the financial 
considerations security concern. The record evidence establishes the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s debts were not incurred under unusual circumstances or due to 
matters beyond his control. His debts are numerous, substantial, and ongoing. When he 
submitted his SCA, Applicant was apparently aware that his past-due debts might raise 
a security concern. In the 30 months that have passed since the submission of the SCA, 
Applicant took no documented action to resolve any of his past-due debts. Applicant’s 
failure to act is puzzling considering his testimony that he has approximately $1,500 a 
month in discretionary income. Instead of paying his debts, Applicant stopped making 
the required $125 monthly payments on the 2009 judgment after submitting his SCA. 
Although I do not question Applicant’s sincerity regarding his desire to change the 
manner in which he manages his finances, he has yet to take any concrete action, to 
include receiving financial counseling, to improve his financial situation. Accordingly, 
none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
 
6 
 
 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.6 Applicant failed to meet his burden.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 I gave due consideration 
to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, including the length of time 
Applicant has held a security clearance, his honesty throughout the security clearance 
process, and the financial support he provides his family. However, the favorable record 
evidence does not outweigh the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial 
situation. He has yet to take control of his finances and resolve his past-due debts. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s present eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f, 1.h – 1.k, and 1.m:      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.l:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). The resolution of non-SOR debts does not mitigate 
the security concerns at issue, because the debts were not satisfied in a manner that denotes good-faith 
adherence to financial obligations. Instead, the past-due tax debts were satisfied through the interception 
of tax refunds and the deficiency balance on the repossessed car was paid through garnishment.  
 
7 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
