 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04106 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement or the personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 2, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 19, 2015. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
he was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. He received the FORM on June 11, 2015. He did not submit 
any information objecting, refuting, explaining, or mitigating the information contained in 
the FORM. The Government’s evidence (Items 1-4) was admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is single and has no children. He has worked for his 
current employer, a defense contractor, since November 2013. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in December 2007. He has never served in the military or previously held a 
security clearance.1  
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR concerning Guideline H includes 
using marijuana three to four times a year from 1998 through December 2013. He also 
purchased two to three grams of marijuana once or twice a year from 2004 through 
2013. He admitted these uses and purchases in his January 2014 security clearance 
application. He also indicated that he intended to continue his use since he lived in a 
state where marijuana use is legal. In March 2014, he was interviewed by a defense 
investigator during his security clearance investigation. He told the investigator that he 
continues to use marijuana three to four times a year when he is skiing or camping with 
friends. When the investigator informed Applicant that marijuana use was illegal under 
federal law and asked him whether he intended to continue his use, Applicant gave an 
affirmative answer unless his employer tells him to stop. He is unaware of what his 
company’s drug policy is and he has never been drug tested by the company. In his 
October 2014 answer to the SOR, he reaffirmed that he intended to continue his 
marijuana use unless told to stop doing so by his employer. His marijuana use and his 
future intentions to continue marijuana use were also cross-alleged as a personal 
conduct allegation. (SOR ¶ 2.a).2 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 Item 1. 
 
2 Items 1-4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
4 
 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Appellant illegally used marijuana from 1998 until 2014 and purchased marijuana 
from 2004 to 2014. He expressed his intent to continue his marijuana use. I find that the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
 Applicant’s admitted marijuana drug use and purchase happened as recently as 
2014. His regular drug use over 16 years is troubling and a cause for concern. 
However, even more troubling was his expressed intent to continue his drug use unless 
told to stop by his employer. Even when told by the defense investigator that marijuana 
use was in violation of federal law, he still indicated he would continue his use.3 These 
circumstances lead me to conclude that his actions cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and especially his judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Clearly, the 
                                                          
3 Regardless of state law, marijuana remains a controlled substance under schedule I of the Controlled 
Substance Act. Federal employees who use illegal drugs are not suitable for federal service. (See 
Memorandum of Director of U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Subject: Federal Laws and Policies 
Prohibiting Marijuana Use, May 26, 2015) 
 
 
5 
 
 
evidence does not support a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, since 
he stated his intent was just the opposite. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
Applicant criminal use and purchase of marijuana and his expressed future 
intentions to continue such use creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding marijuana use and 
his future intentions. Applicant’s contact is likely to recur and he has not taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerabilities. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(e) do not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant engaged in recent drug 
use and intends to continue his use in the future. Therefore, he failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the concerns for Guideline H, drug involvement, and 
Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
