 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05466 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of poly-drug abuse that ended in 2013. He sought 
professional counseling and has made positive lifestyle changes to avoid any future 
drug involvement. He is now a dedicated, mature, and responsible professional. He 
mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 21, 2013. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) on November 15, 2014.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 31, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2015. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 8, 2015, 
scheduling a hearing for June 1, 2015.  
 
Department Counsel offered one exhibit into evidence (Government Exhibit (GE) 
1), and Applicant offered eight exhibits into evidence (AE A through H). There were no 
objections, and I admitted all exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 8, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e 
and 1.f. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, with explanations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact:   
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He completed 
bachelor’s degrees in electrical engineering in 2004, and in computer engineering in 
2006. He received his master’s degree in electrical engineering in 2007, and his 
doctorate’s degree in December 2012. Applicant has never been married, and has no 
children. He has been working for his current employer, a prestigious physics 
laboratory, since August 2013. He requires a security clearance to continue his 
employment.  
 
 Applicant disclosed in his 2013 SCA (his first SCA) a history of illegal poly-drug 
use. Between February 2003 and May 2013, Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency; between 2008 and 2009, he used LSD (Lysergic acid diethylamide) about 19 
times; between 2009 and 2011, he used psilocybin mushrooms about 5 times; in 2010, 
he used 2CE (psychedelic phenethylamine) about 4 times; in 2009, he used cocaine 
once; in 2010, he used MDMA (Ecstasy) about 4 times; and in 2011, he used Ketamine 
about 3 times. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug of choice was marijuana. He only used the other illegal 
substances when they were provided to him by friends at concerts or other social 
activities. On various occasions, Applicant purchased and sold marijuana. He sold small 
amounts of his personal marijuana smoking supply at or below cost to his close friends. 
He estimated that he sold marijuana about seven times over a period of five years. He 
denied ever selling illegal drugs for profit. He also contributed money to marijuana-
buying funds for his and his friends’ personal use. 
 
 Applicant explained that he grew up with a strong religious upbringing in a 
conservative, small town. He did not use any illegal drugs while in high school. He 
started to experiment with illegal drugs during college (2003), at age 21-22. Because of 
his sexual orientation, he experienced discrimination and had difficulty adjusting to the 
rejections from college friends and the church. He made new friends in the gay 
community that used illegal drugs on a frequent and social basis, and he saw his use of 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
illegal drugs as part of the socializing process. Applicant used marijuana to relax, and to 
cope with his depression and fears. He did not use alcohol because it exacerbated his 
depression. 
 
 In 2007, Applicant became depressed and sought out psychological counseling 
in 2008, and then again in 2011-2012. He sought counseling because he believed he 
was using marijuana on a regular basis as a coping mechanism for his depression, and 
he did not want to live the rest of his life using illegal drugs to deal with his depression. 
He also was treated by a psychiatrist, and was prescribed anti-depressants, which he 
used until late 2012. He was diagnosed with depression, but did not receive a 
substance abuse diagnosis. He is not currently taking any medications. Applicant 
testified that his treatment worked well, and he was able to stop using marijuana by the 
end of his doctorate program. His most recent use of marijuana was during a reunion 
with college friends in May 2013. Applicant denied any association with his college 
drug-using friends and associates since May 2013. 
 
 Applicant started working for his employer in August 2013. He loves his job, and 
has a good relationship with his coworkers and supervisors. He no longer feels rejected 
or discriminated because of his sexual orientation. On the contrary, he feels like he is 
part of a large family where he receives positive reinforcement for his good 
performance. He denied any association with any illegal drug users since he started 
working for his employer.  
 
 Applicant expressed remorse and shame for his use of illegal drugs. He believes 
he is now a much happier person without the use of drugs. Applicant has no intention to 
ever use illegal drugs again. Through his counseling, he has addressed the underlying 
psychological stresses that led to his illegal drug use. He now knows that there are legal 
treatments available that he can seek if he should have a need for them again. 
Applicant signed a statement of intent to not use illegal drugs in the future, and agreed 
to the automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. (AE G) 
 
 Applicant submitted favorable reference letters provided by a friend, a teacher, a 
college professor, and his two current supervisors. The references corroborate 
Applicant’s explanations concerning his upbringing and past personal problems. The 
two supervisors lauded Applicant’s performance. He is considered to be an impeccable 
professional, extremely reliable, and technically knowledgeable. He has earned the trust 
of his supervisors and was given a position in technical leadership for a program. Both 
supervisors endorsed Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
AG ¶ 25 describes two drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse;”2 and “(c) illegal drug possession.”  
 
Applicant has a history of illegal drug involvement. Between February 2003 and 
May 2013, he used marijuana with varying frequency, and experimented with LSD, 
psilocybin mushrooms, 2CE, cocaine, Ecstasy, and Ketamine. He purchased and 
sometimes sold marijuana (not for profit) on diverse occasions. Applicant disclosed his 
drug involvement on his 2013 SCA, his SOR response, and at his hearing. AG ¶¶ 25(a) 
and 25(c) apply.  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Applicant recognized the adverse impact his drug abuse had on his life and 
sought out psychological and psychiatric counseling in 2008, and 2011-2012. He has 
not used any illegal drugs after May 2013. He has disassociated from his drug-using 
associates, friends, and contacts. He has broken his pattern of drug abuse, and he has 
changed his lifestyle with respect to illegal drug use. He moved to another state and his 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
job performance shows that he is now a mature professional, reliable, dependable, and 
trustworthy.  
 
Through his counseling, Applicant addressed the underlying psychological 
stresses that led to his illegal drug use. (He received counseling for depression, and not 
for substance abuse problems.) He now knows that there are legal treatments he can 
seek if he should have a need for them again. Additionally, he signed a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. His current behavior is 
encouraging and creates some certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. 
Applicant’s past illegal drug use does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a), (b), and (d) apply and mitigate the drug 
involvement security concerns. AG ¶ 26(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not 
abuse prescription drugs.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant was young and immature when he began using illegal drugs. His drug 
abuse may have been caused, in part, by his mental and emotional problems. Applicant 
is now a 33-year-old employee of a federal contractor and makes significant 
contributions to his employer. He sought professional counseling and has made positive 
lifestyle changes. He is now a dedicated professional.  
 
Applicant was truthful and forthcoming during the security clearance process. His 
admissions of illegal drug-related behavior on his SCA are a positive sign that Applicant 
has matured and is taking responsibility for past misconduct. He stopped using illegal 
drugs in May 2013. He has demonstrated that he knows the possible adverse 
consequences he will face if he engages in any additional illegal drug abuse. I am 
impressed with Applicant’s sincerity and commitment to change, his promise to continue 
to refrain from using illegal drugs, and his decision to be honest in security matters. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
