 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03609 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleges he is delinquent on a home equity loan and has unpaid Federal and state 
income taxes due for tax years 2011 and 2012. He failed to document payment on his 
delinquent obligations. The financial considerations security concerns have not been 
mitigated. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on October 27, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons detailing security concerns. On 
December 5, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated June 25, 2015. The FORM contained six attachments (Items). 
On July 8, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He was informed he could submit any material he 
wished to be considered. His response was due August 7, 2015. No material was 
received. On September 21, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted owing the second mortgage on a 
house that went to foreclosure and owing state and Federal income tax. He asserted, 
but failed to provide documentation, that he had arranged repayment agreements with 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the state franchise tax board. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old environmental laboratory technician who has worked 
for a defense contractor since January 1984 and seeks to obtain a security clearance.2 
(Item 3) From September 1977 through August 1983, he honorably served in the U.S. 
Navy. (Item 3, 6) Applicant provided no information about his duty performance and 
provided no character reference letters.  
 
 In Applicant’s January 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he indicated he failed to pay his 2010 taxes and estimated he owed 
$14,500. (Item 3) He also indicated that he had a debt payment agreement in place with 
the IRS and state covering tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012. (Item 3) In his January 
2014 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), he indicated his tax debts had not yet been 
satisfied, but he was current on the debt repayment program. (Item 6) He indicated his 
current financial situation was a struggle. (Item 6) 
 
 On Applicant’s e-QIP, he stated that his financial problems commenced in 
January 2010 and resulted in the foreclosure of his investment real estate in October 
2013. (Item 3) In February 2004, he had a $363,000 mortgage. (Item 4) In May 2004, he 
had a $75,000 line of credit. (Item 4, 5, 6) He borrowed money from his residence to 
pay on investment real estate “to capitalize on the growing real estate market at the 
time.” (Item 6) He asserted foreclosure occurred when he was unable to borrow 
additional funds. (Item 6)  
 
 In Applicant’s PSI, he said he “intends to pay off his debt entirely.” (Item 6) In 
2006, Applicant went to arbitration after failing to return the renter’s security deposit 
because they failed to take care of the house. The arbiter rendered a decision against 
Applicant and the $400 to $500 security deposit was returned. (Item 6)  
                                                          
2 Applicant indicated he had a clearance while in the U.S. Navy prior to obtaining his current employment. 
(Item 3) 
 
3 
 
The FORM indicated Applicant stated the mortgage was in foreclosure and that 
he was paying his tax debt, but no documentary evidence was provided to support 
these assertions. Nor had he provided any information as to how and why the debts 
were incurred. (FORM) Absent documentary evidence of payment, the Government 
argued, he failed to mitigate the concern. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
 
4 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. Applicants are not required to be debt 
free, but are required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s investment real estate went to foreclosure resulting in a delinquent 
account of more than $67,000 and he failed to pay his Federal and state income tax for 
tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012.3 AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
3 Although Applicant failed to file and pay his 2010 Federal and state income tax returns, only tax years 
2011 and 2012 are listed in the SOR. In reaching a decision as to security worthiness, only his failure to 
file and pay taxes for these two tax years listed in the SOR have been considered.  
 
5 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been 
employed with his current employer since January 1984. In January 2014, a year and a 
half ago, he was made aware of the Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. 
He indicated he intended to pay his debts and had a repayment plan to address his 
Federal and state tax debts. He provided no documentation showing payment on his 
debts. By failing to document the payment of delinquent debts he has failed to act 
responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant provided no information as to how and why the delinquent debts 
occurred and what caused his inability to pay his delinquent financial obligations. The 
housing market did decline causing real estate prices to lower. There is evidence the 
investment property had been rented at one time, but there is little documentation 
evidencing factors beyond his control. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 In his January 2014 PSI, Applicant provided no indication he intended to repay 
the equity loan, other than his general statement that he intended to pay his debts. In 
October 2014, he received the SOR listing the Government’s concern over the unpaid 
equity loan and unpaid taxes. In June 2015, he received the FORM and was informed 
he could submit documentation as to the status of his delinquent accounts. No 
documents were received. 
 
 Applicant was given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, 
Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He provided no 
evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. He has not demonstrated that 
 
6 
his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring them under 
control. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no 
showing of a good-faith effort to satisfy debts or a showing that payments have been 
made in accord with a repayment agreement. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply.    
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not disputed any of the delinquent debts. He admitted all of the debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on his delinquent accounts. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since his January 2014 interview, which was 
reinforced by the October 2014 SOR, and June 2015 FORM. There is no 
documentation of payment.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. He failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past 
efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such information, and by 
relying solely on scant explanation in his response to the SOR, he failed to mitigate the 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
7 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – there is no 
documentation that any payments have been made – it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
