 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06093 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guidelines F 
(financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 28, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
 
2 
 
 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. On February 12, 2015, Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On March 30, 2015, the case was 
assigned to me. On April 27, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for May 13, 2015. The 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
7, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. Applicant’s objections 
to GE 3-7 were overruled. The record of the proceeding was left open until May 27, 
2015, to provide Applicant the opportunity to present additional matters. He submitted 
documents that were marked as AE B through N. Department Counsel’s prehearing 
letter sent to Applicant was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1; her email to the Applicant 
on May 4, 2015, was marked as HE 2; her list of exhibits as HE 3; and her email 
forwarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission as HE 4. The transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing was received on May 20, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background information 
 
a. Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for his current employer since January 2000. He graduated from high school in 
1980 and has completed some college courses. He served on active duty in the U.S. 
Marine Corps from July 1981 to July 1984, served in the Marine Corps Reserve from 
April 1986 to July 1988, and received honorable discharges for his military service. He 
has been married and divorced three times.1 
 
b. Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant did not file his federal 
income tax returns for 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Under Guideline 
E, the SOR cross-alleged the Guideline F allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a and further alleged 
that Applicant had been charged or cited for five criminal offenses and two traffic 
citations (SOR ¶¶ 2.b–2.h). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 2.a and admitted the remaining allegations with comments. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings as fact.2 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a – failing to file federal income tax returns 
 
a. In his security clearance application (SCA) dated March 4, 2014, Applicant 
disclosed that he failed to file his federal income tax returns since 2009, but indicated 
that he paid his taxes each year. He attributed his tax-filing problems to not having 
                                                          
1 Tr. 7-8; GE 1; AE H, J. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
access to records after he and his ex-wife separated. He stated that he was working 
with an accounting firm to file the income tax returns.3 
 
b. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he filed his federal income tax returns 
for 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014, but failed to produce any documentation confirming 
those tax returns were filed. He stated that he hired a tax service in February or March 
to assist him in filing the tax returns and filed them in early April 2015. He stated that he 
did not file his federal income tax returns for 2009 and 2010 because his tax preparer 
told him he “couldn’t go back that far and that the IRS would send [him] a letter if there 
was anything that [he] needed to address for those years.”4 
 
c. In addressing why he failed to file the tax returns in a timely manner, Applicant 
testified that, after he and his ex-wife separated in 2009, he did not have access to 
receipts and other paperwork needed for filing his federal income tax return for that 
year. He stated he was never able to obtain all the paperwork needed to claim certain 
deductions, but obtained some of the documents after his divorce in 2011. He also lost 
records when his storage unit had a leak in 2010 or 2012. He further indicated that, 
although he was paying child support, state authorities thought he was behind on those 
payments and threatened to seize his federal income tax refund, which prompted him to 
delay filing those tax returns.5 
 
d. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided copies of the first two 
pages of his federal income tax returns for 2012, 2013, and 2014. In that submission, he 
indicated that he was providing a copy of his 2011 federal tax return, but failed to do so. 
Instead of submitting the 2011 tax return, he appears to have mistakenly submitted two 
copies of his 2014 income tax return. The copies of the tax returns that he provided 
were neither signed by him nor dated. The 2012 and 2014 tax returns reflected that they 
were prepared by a tax service on March 10, 2015. According to the tax returns, he 
owed the IRS past-due taxes in the amount of $5,511 for 2012 and $1,891 for 2013, but 
was due a refund of $1,000 for 2014. No documents were provided to confirm that the 
IRS received the income tax returns or that he paid the past-due taxes that were owed.6 
 
SOR ¶ 2.b – 1991 criminal charge. In September 1991, Applicant was charged 
with fraud – insufficient fund check, a misdemeanor. In October 1991, he pled nolo 
contendere to that charge and adjudication was withheld. He provided proof to the court 
that the check was paid.7 
                                                          
3 GE 1, 2. 
4 Tr. 43-45; GE 1. 
5 Tr. 31-34, 41-56; GE 2.    
6 AE K-N; HE 4. 
7 Tr. 38-39, 57; GE 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 2.c – 1995 criminal charge. In May 1995, Applicant was charged with 
operating a vehicle off an established road, a misdemeanor. In September 1995, he 
was found guilty of that charge. He testified that he drove on a dirt road to a swimming 
hole that he had driven on for many years. Only after he was ticketed for this offense did 
he notice a sign that was not clearly visible on a tree indicating the road was closed. He 
stated this charge was ridiculous.8 
 
SOR ¶ 2.d – 1999 criminal charge. In December 1999, Applicant was charged 
with aggravated battery and cruelty towards a child, both felonies. He testified that his 
then wife had mental health problems and assaulted him. He defended himself by 
holding her wrists and sitting on her on a chair until she calmed down. She later called 
the police and he was arrested. The cruelty towards a child involved him spanking his 
son with a belt. He claimed that he did not know spanking a child with a belt was illegal. 
The police report indicated that photos of his son’s legs revealed severe bruises. In 
March 2000, he pled nolo contendere to battery, a misdemeanor; adjudication was 
withheld; and he was placed on 12 months of probation. In August 2000, he pled nolo 
contendere to child abuse, a felony; adjudication was withheld; and he was placed on 
two years probation. He also was ordered to attend parenting classes.9 
 
SOR ¶ 2.e – 2000 traffic citation. In February 2000, Applicant was issued a traffic 
citation for failure to obey a traffic control device after he was involved in an accident. 
Applicant claimed he had a green light when he went through an intersection. 
Apparently, the other driver in the accident and a witness claimed the other driver had a 
green light. When the police officer did not appear in court, this citation was dismissed.10 
 
SOR ¶ 2.f – 2001 criminal charge. In January 2001, Applicant was charged with 
battery and resisting arrest without violence. While visiting neighbors near his sister’s 
house, he indicated that the neighbors started getting drunk and aggressive. According 
to Applicant, he left that location to return to his sister’s house. The neighbors followed 
him and assaulted him. He claimed he called the police who believed the neighbor’s 
version of the events. The police report indicated that Applicant made a sexual pass to 
a woman, that an argument ensued, and that Applicant threw a coffee table at an 
individual. The police officer reported that Applicant appeared intoxicated and stated he 
had consumed five beers and three shots of whiskey. Upon being advised that he was 
under arrest, Applicant attempted to run from the police officer and attempted to pull 
away as handcuffs were being placed on him. The police had to wrestle him to the 
ground to restrain him. The charges were dropped when Applicant wrote a letter of 
apology to the neighbors. He also completed 30 hours of community service.11 
                                                          
8 Tr. 57-58; GE 4. 
9 Tr. 35-37, 39, 58-60; GE 2, 3, 4, 7. 
10 Tr. 60-61; GE 4.  
11 Tr. 34-35, 61-62; GE 2, 4, 6.  
 
5 
 
 
SOR ¶ 2.g – 2009 criminal charge. In March 2009, Applicant was charged with 
assault with an intended threat to do violence (domestic), a misdemeanor. He reportedly 
threatened his wife and threw coffee on her during this incident. In July 2009, he pled 
nolo contendere to the charge. Adjudication was withheld and he was placed on six 
months of probation, ordered to undergo a domestic violence evaluation, undergo 
random drug and alcohol tests, and maintain full-time employment.12 
 
SOR ¶ 2.h – 2012 traffic citation. In April 2012, Applicant was issued a traffic 
citation for careless driving after he was involved in an accident. He testified that he 
accidently bumped the truck in front of him in bumper-to-bumper traffic. Adjudication 
was withheld in this case after he opted to attend a defensive driving school and pay a 
fine and court costs.13 
 
Character Evidence  
 
a. Applicant presented letters of reference from a supervisor, coworkers, and 
friends that attest to his reliability, honesty, dedication, integrity, and good character. His 
supervisor stated that Applicant is an asset to the company. Letters from his ex-wife, 
children, and a stepchild indicated that he is a devoted father.14 
 
b. In the Marine Corps, Applicant received two meritorious masts for outstanding 
performance of duty. He was also awarded the Good Conduct Medal. He testified that 
he has worked in his current job for 30 years, but apparently for different defense 
contractors. He submitted a work performance evaluation from August 1985 to May 
2015 that reflected his performance has been satisfactory (the highest category).15 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
                                                          
12 Tr. 37-38, 62-63; GE 2, 4. 5 
13 Tr. 39-40, 63; GE 4. 
14 AE A-C.   
15 AE D-J.   
 
6 
 
 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established the following 
disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 19:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required . . . . 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
 Applicant failed to file his 2009-2013 federal income tax returns as required. At 
the hearing, he testified that he filed his 2011-2013 tax returns. Although he provided 
unsigned and undated copies of the 2012-2014 tax returns in his post-hearing 
submission, I find that he most likely filed those tax returns. In general, however, he 
failed to show that he acted responsibly in the filing of his tax returns. His explanation 
for his failure to file his tax returns in a timely manner was not persuasive. His tax 
returns for 2009 and 2010 have not yet been filed. The other tax returns were filed only 
after his receipt of the SOR.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 From the evidence presented, I am unable to conclude that his failure to file his 
tax returns in a timely manner happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under circumstances that make such failures unlikely to recur. His tax-filing problems 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
None of the mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior. . .; and 
 
* * * 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 lists four personal conduct mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
In 2000, Applicant pled nolo contendere to felony child abuse, a serious offense. 
The 2001 incident involving his sister’s neighbors is also troubling. The remaining 
criminal charges and traffic citations when viewed in isolation do not appear serious, but 
when considered as a whole with the other allegations, particularly his tax-filing 
problems, show a pattern of unreliable behavior. His conduct involving questionable 
judgment is recent. From the evidence presented, I am unable to find that such 
unreliable behavior is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his suitability for a 
security clearance. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
 
10 
 
 
and the whole-person concept. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 Applicant served honorably on active duty in the Marine Corps for three years, in 
the Marine Corps Reserve for two years, and for a defense contractor for 30 years. He 
is a valued employee. Nonetheless, his pattern of unreliable behavior raises questions 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
   Subparagraphs 1.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
   Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
