 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 14-03109 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related conduct from 1982 to April 2013 resulted in police 
involvement five times. In 2008, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He continued 
to consume alcohol as recently as two weeks before his hearing. Criminal conduct 
security concerns are mitigated; however, alcohol consumption security concerns are 
not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 9, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86).  
(GE 1) On March 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant 
to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
   
The SOR and amended SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines G 
(alcohol consumption) and J (criminal conduct). (HE 2) The SOR and amended SOR 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
detailed reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with national security to continue a security clearance for 
Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be continued or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On April 2, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR, and on July 6, 2015, he 
responded to the amended SOR. (HE 3) On July 27, 2015, Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed. On July 30, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me. On August 28, 2015, DOHA issued a notice of the 
hearing, setting the hearing for September 14, 2015. (HE 1) Applicant waived his right 
to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 15-
16) The hearing was held as scheduled. During Applicant’s video teleconference 
hearing, the video portion stopped working. (Tr. 35) Applicant elected to continue the 
proceeding as a teleconference without video. (Tr. 35-36) Department Counsel offered 
three exhibits into evidence, and Applicant offered seven exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 18-
20, 33-34; GE 1-3; AE A-G) There were no objections, and I admitted all proffered 
exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 20, 33-34; GE 1-3; AE A-G) On September 22, 2015, I 
received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s SOR responses, he admitted the allegations in amended SOR ¶ 
1.e and SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant made some other admissions about some of the other 
SOR allegations, and he provided clarifying comments and extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a large DOD contractor, who has provided 
program manager services for his employer since 2007. (Tr. 6, 9, 36-37; GE 1) His 
current annual salary is $185,000. (Tr. 37) He does not believe his job responsibilities 
will change if his security clearance is revoked. (Tr. 37-38) He has worked for the same 
DOD contractor since 1990. (Tr. 9, 35, 39)  
 
In 1972, Applicant graduated from high school, and in 1987, he received a 
bachelor’s of science degree in electrical engineering. (Tr. 8) He served in the Navy 
from 1975 to 1981. (Tr. 9, 39) He left active duty as a petty officer first class, and he 
received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 9) He served in the Navy Active Reserve from 
1984 to 1987. (Tr. 39; GE 1) In 1976, he married, and in 1986, he divorced. (Tr. 40) In 
1991, he married his spouse. (Tr. 39-40) His children are ages 12, 14, and 30. (Tr. 40) 
He has held a security clearance for more than 35 years. There is no evidence of 
security violations, use of illegal drugs, or criminal offenses aside from his arrests for 
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI).   
 
                                            
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant was counseled about alcohol consumption while he was in the Navy. 
(Tr. 42) He attended a brief Navy alcohol-awareness class. (Tr. 43)   
 
In February 1982, Applicant was arrested for DUI. (SOR response ¶¶ 1.g and 
2.a) His breathalyzer result was .10 percent. (Tr. 44) The charge was reduced to 
reckless driving, and he received a $75 fine and court costs of $20. (Tr. 43-45; SOR ¶¶ 
1.g and 2.a) He attended an alcohol education class. (Tr. 44) 
 
In April 1984, Applicant was arrested for drunk in public. (Tr. 45-46; SOR 
response ¶¶ 1.f and 2.a) He was fined $30. (SOR response ¶ 1.f and 2.a) 
 
In August 1987, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. (Amended SOR ¶ 
1.e) Applicant said he was not aware of the breathalyzer test results. (Tr. 79) He 
pleaded guilty to DUI; the court imposed a fine; and his driver’s license was suspended 
for one year. (Tr. 47; Amended SOR ¶ 1.e) 
 
In November 2008, Applicant received treatment from an alcohol-treatment 
center. (SOR ¶ 1.b) SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. 
Applicant said he did not recall seeing that diagnosis on any documentation from the 
alcohol-treatment center. (Tr. 77) The alcohol-treatment center’s records indicated he 
was diagnosed as alcohol dependent; however, the record did not include the 
qualifications of the person who made the diagnosis. (Tr. 77, 79)2 He consumed 
sufficient alcohol to pass out. (Tr. 52) His spouse urged him to seek help with his 
alcohol consumption, and Applicant elected to seek inpatient alcohol treatment in 
November 2008. (Tr. 52, 55, 58) He received 20 days of treatment. (Tr. 53) Applicant 
said he did not understand what it meant to be labeled as “alcohol dependent.” (Tr. 53) 
He did not believe he was addicted to alcohol. (Tr. 54) He acknowledged he is a “binge” 
drinker; however, he is able to refrain from alcohol consumption for several days or 
much longer. (Tr. 54) He conceded he was an alcoholic. (Tr. 55-56) About half the time 
when he drank alcohol, he consumed alcohol until he was legally intoxicated; however, 
he was rarely sufficiently intoxicated to be incoherent. (Tr. 60) 
 
In April 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. (Tr. 61-63, 69; SOR 
¶¶ 1.d and 2.a) He had been drinking alcohol earlier in the day. (Tr. 61) His breathalyzer 
result was .10 percent “or something like that.” (Tr. 62) He was found guilty of reckless 
driving, fined $450, assessed court costs of $105, sentenced to 180 days in jail, and his 
driver’s license was suspended for 90 days. (Tr. 62-63; SOR response ¶¶ 1.d and 2.a) 
He attended an “alcoholic intervention program.” (Tr. 63)  
 
                                            
2In Applicant’s SOR response he said, “The diagnosis of Alcohol Dependent was a clinical label 
that was not arguable as it was based on the evaluator’s subjective assessment of wide ranging criteria 
that could easily [have] been assigned to a person in the program.” He concluded his SOR response with 
a description of his efforts to “control my alcohol dependence,” and he emphasized his “stellar, 
trustworthy performance” on duty.   
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant has been attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings sporadically 
for 14 years. In about 2012, he increased his attendance at AA meetings to six times a 
week. (Tr. 64-70) He was able to get to “probably [step] three” in the AA 12-step 
program. (Tr. 66) Over the last six months, he has attended AA meetings “a couple of 
times a week, something like that.” (Tr. 70) 
 
 Applicant’s January 9, 2013 SF 86 asked whether in the previous seven years he 
had been charged, convicted, or sentenced for a crime in any court? Applicant 
responded that he was involved in a reckless driving offense in April 2010, which 
resulted in his arrest and conviction. In June 2010, he was involved in another reckless 
driving offense. He was found guilty of a misdemeanor; his driver’s license was limited 
for 90 days; and he went to a weekend alcohol-awareness program. Applicant 
answered “No” to the question asking, “Have you EVER been charged with an offense 
involving alcohol or drugs?”. Applicant disclosed his alcohol-related treatment in 2008, 
noting he was “[d]rinking too much that it was [a]ffecting my health” and his “[w]ife was 
concerned.” Applicant explained that he did not list his other alcohol-related arrests 
because he thought the information sought was limited to the previous seven years, and 
he meant to indicate the reckless driving offense was in 2011 and not in 2010. (Tr. 47-
49) Applicant’s 2006 SF 86 contained the same failure to disclose his alcohol-related 
arrests in the 1980s. (Tr. 49)3  
 
In March 2013, Applicant was intoxicated, and there was a firearm he purchased 
in his residence. (SOR ¶ 1.h) Applicant gave the firearm to his spouse, and she took it 
outside and placed it in their vehicle. (Tr. 84-86) Applicant’s spouse called the police 
because she was concerned about safety issues, and Applicant was taken to a mental 
health facility, where he was an inpatient for two weeks. (Tr. 84-86; SOR ¶ 1.h) When 
the police arrived, Applicant’s spouse provided the firearm to the police. (Tr. 78, 84-85) 
Applicant did not believe he was arrested in 2013. (Tr. 78)  
 
 Applicant said he was not aware of any other alcohol-related arrests in addition 
to those listed on his SOR. (Tr. 72) Applicant drank four beers two weeks before his 
hearing while he was on a golf outing. (Tr. 71, 87)  
  
                                            
3Applicant’s SOR does not allege that he intentionally failed to provide accurate information about 
his history of alcohol-related arrests and charges on his SF 86. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR 
may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). Applicant’s statements on his 2006 and 2013 SF 86s denying alcohol-related charges will 
not be considered for any purpose because of the absence of sufficient notice and opportunity to explain 
his responses on his 2006 and 2013 SF 86s. 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant has supported cub scouts and a boy scout troop for several years. (Tr. 
26; AE E, G) He actively volunteers in his church, and he has made important 
contributions to several church entities. (Tr. 27-28; SOR response) Since 2012, he has 
been involved in youth sports. In 2014, he was an assistant coach, and 2015, he 
coached two teams. (Tr. 28; AE F)  
 
 Applicant has received exceptional evaluations from his employer for at least 
eight years. (AE A-D; SOR response) He has made important contributions to mission 
accomplishment. (AE A-D) 
 
Applicant’s spouse has been an active duty commissioned officer for more than 
20 years. (Tr. 80) She is a senior officer with important responsibilities. (Tr. 80) She 
considers her husband to be trustworthy and responsible. (Tr. 81)    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
 Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(b), 22(c), and 22(f) apply. Applicant had five alcohol-related incidents 
involving either the police or courts or both. Applicant engaged in binge-alcohol 
consumption to the extent of impaired judgment.4 In 2008, he received inpatient alcohol-
related treatment, was diagnosed as alcohol dependent,5 he had a DUI/reckless driving 
arrest in 2011, and an alcohol-related incident involving the police in 2013.  
                                            
4Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted 
definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The 
definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 
NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ 
winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf.  
 
5The well-respected psychiatric reference, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR). Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 2000, 
which was in effect at the time of Applicant’s diagnosis, has defined “alcohol dependence” to be a 
psychiatric condition that meets the following diagnostic criteria:  
  
A maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or 
distress, as manifested by three (or more) of the following, occurring at any time in the 
same 12-month period:  
 
(1) Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: (a) a need for markedly increased 
amounts of the alcohol to achieve intoxication or desired effect; or (b) markedly 
diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the alcohol.  
 
(2) Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: (a) the characteristic withdrawal 
syndrome from the alcohol; or (b) the same (or a closely related) alcohol is taken to 
relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.  
 
(3) The alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was 
intended.  
 
(4) There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use.  
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
                                                                                                                                            
(5) A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the alcohol (e.g., visiting 
multiple doctors or driving long distances), using the alcohol, or recovering from its 
effects.  
 
(6) Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced 
because of alcohol use.  
 
(7) The alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent 
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by 
the alcohol (e.g., continued drinking despite recognition that an ulcer was made worse by 
alcohol consumption). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant has attended an alcohol 
rehabilitation or counseling program, and he is currently attending AA meetings. He 
continued to consume alcohol, and he drank four beers as recently as two weeks before 
his hearing. He has not provided “a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program.” 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of 
substantial alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless 
there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR 
Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).  For 
example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board 
reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant 
continued to drink even after his second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s 
application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB 
had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 
2000, six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his 
alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol 
(not to intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued 
alcohol consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary 
and capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) 
(involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and 
reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
After careful consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption, I have doubts about Applicant’s continued alcohol consumption because 
alcohol-related incidents involving the police and courts are likely to recur. His continued 
alcohol consumption, as shown by his consumption of four beers two weeks before his 
hearing, casts doubt Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Alcohol consumption concerns are not mitigated.   
   
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and 
“(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of 
DUI in 1987. His other two DUI arrests resulted in convictions for reckless driving which 
may be criminal offenses. His drunk in public offense may also constitute a crime under 
state law. In any event, these four alcohol-related offenses are not felonies.    
  
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) applies. Applicant has stopped driving after becoming intoxicated. His 
most recent DUI resulting in a conviction was in 1987, and his most recent DUI arrest 
was in 2011. He is not likely to commit another DUI. Moreover, all of his involvement 
with law enforcement has been directly related to his alcohol consumption, and security 
concerns are best addressed in this instance under the alcohol consumption guideline. 
The absence of any criminal conduct over the last four years is sufficient to mitigate 
criminal conduct security concerns.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting continuation of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant is 60-year-old employee of a large DOD contractor, 
who has provided program manager services for his employer since 2007. He has 
worked for the same DOD contractor since 1990. In 1987, he received a bachelor’s of 
science degree in electrical engineering. He honorably served in the Navy from 1975 to 
1981, and he left active duty as a petty officer first class. Applicant has supported cub 
scouts, a boy scout troop, and youth sports for several years. He actively volunteers in 
his church, and he has made important contributions to several church entities. 
Applicant is an intelligent person, who has an outstanding record working for a DOD 
contractor. He has received exceptional evaluations from his employer for at least eight 
years, and he has made important contributions to accomplishment of his employer’s 
mission. His spouse, an active duty commissioned officer for more than 20 years, 
considers Applicant to be trustworthy and responsible. He has held a security clearance 
for more than 35 years. There is no evidence of security violations, use of illegal drugs, 
or criminal offenses aside from his alcohol-related arrests.   
 
The evidence supporting denial of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial than 
the evidence supporting approval of his security clearance. Applicant’s alcohol-related 
conduct from 1982 to April 2013 resulted in police involvement five times. He was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2008. He relapsed after receiving alcohol-related 
inpatient treatment. He continued to consume alcohol as recently as two weeks before 
his hearing. Excessive alcohol consumption followed by driving a motor vehicle shows a 
lack of judgment, rehabilitation, and impulse control and may result in a reckless driving 
or DUI conviction. There is no favorable medical diagnosis, evaluation, or prognosis of 
his alcohol consumption. “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 21) Applicant’s conduct leaves me 
with unresolved questions and doubts about his sincerity and determination to end his 
alcohol consumption.  
    
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Criminal conduct security concerns 
are mitigated; however, alcohol consumption security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
