 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-02851 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges two delinquent collection 
accounts totaling $28,194. His $27,016 SOR debt was the result of underemployment 
and loss of income. He settled the $27,016 debt. He disputed his responsibility for the 
$1,178 SOR debt. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 3) On September 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 
20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 4, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF could not make the finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR allegations and did not 
request a hearing. (Item 2) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated June 15, 2015, was provided to him on June 22, 2015.1 Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.3 He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old associate engineer, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2011.4 Applicant did not disclose any unemployment in the last 
15 years. He honorably served on active duty in the Army from 2000 to 2006, and he 
left active duty service as a sergeant. He served in Afghanistan as a government 
contractor from October 2006 to February 2008. (Item 6)    
 
Applicant has never been married, and he does not have any children. He is a 
high school graduate. He attended college; however, he did not receive a degree. He 
disclosed the two SOR debts on his SF 86. (Items 1 and 3) Applicant had a security 
clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) when he was on 
active duty. There is no evidence of criminal conduct, abuse of alcohol, use of illegal 
drugs, or security violations.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges two delinquent collection accounts totaling $28,194. He 
owed his $27,016 SOR debt as a result of a resort-timeshare contract, which he 
purchased in November 2008. (Item 2) In 2011, his annual income decreased from 
about $80,000 to about $50,000, and he could not afford payments to the resort-
timeshare creditor. (Items 1 and 2) He entered negotiations with the creditor, in 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated June 16, 2015, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated June 22, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 2)   
 
4Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s January 30, 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86) is the source for the 
facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph. (Item 3) 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
November 2012, the creditor offered to settle the balance by “accept[ing] back” 
Applicant’s membership. (Item 2) Applicant accepted the offer, and the creditor provided 
a 2012 Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form 1099-A, stating the “Balance of Principal 
outstanding” was $27,016 and the “Fair market value of property” was $37,098. (Item 2) 
This debt is resolved. 
 
Applicant attended a technical university under the post-911 GI Bill, and the 
Department of Veteran’s Affairs (VA) funded his education. (Item 2) The technical 
university, the VA, and Applicant disputed responsibility for $1,178. (Item 2) Applicant 
said the school advised him that if the VA did not pay the debt, the school would forgive 
it. (Item 2) Applicant promised to pay the debt if the school continues to seek payment, 
explaining that the school is withholding his diploma until the bill is paid. (Item 2)     
 
Applicant’s February 1, 2014 credit report shows 17 accounts with a designation 
of “pays as agreed,” and the only two negative entries were the two SOR debts. (Item 4) 
His May 5, 2015 credit report shows 18 accounts, and one derogatory entry, the past-
due debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 5)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, and SOR response. His SOR alleges two 
delinquent collection accounts totaling $28,194. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(d). Applicant’s underemployment and reduction in income are circumstances 
largely beyond his control that caused his financial problems. He acted responsibly by 
negotiating and settling his $27,016 SOR debt.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies to Applicant’s $1,178 SOR debt. Applicant was entitled to VA 
education benefits, and he was attending a technical university. The VA funded his 
tuition. A dispute arose between the VA and the technical university. It was reasonable 
for Applicant to exhaust resolution between the VA and the technical university before 
paying the debt. If the VA does not pay the debt, and the technical university fails to 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
forgive it, Applicant will have to either pay the debt or sue the technical university to 
obtain his diploma. Applicant has promised to successfully dispute or pay this debt.     
 
  Applicant’s delinquent debts “occurred under such circumstances that [are] 
unlikely to recur and [do] not cast doubt on [his] current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” Applicant has learned from his experiences; there are clear indications 
that the problem is resolved; his finances are under control; and he showed good faith 
in the resolution of his financial problems. Applicant admitted responsibility for and took 
reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his SOR debts. His efforts are sufficient 
to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old associate engineer, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2011. He honorably served on active duty in the Army from 2000 
to 2006, and he left active service as a sergeant. He served in Afghanistan as a 
government contractor from October 2006 to February 2008. He attended college; 
however, he did not receive a degree. He disclosed his two SOR debts on his SF 86. 
He is sufficiently mature to understand and comply with his security responsibilities. 
Underemployment and reduction in income caused his financial woes. I give Applicant 
substantial credit for maintaining contact with his creditors and either paying, settling, or 
disputing, all of his debts. Applicant had a security clearance with access to SCI when 
he was on active duty. There is no evidence of criminal conduct, abuse of alcohol, use 
of illegal drugs, or security violations.       
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to maintain his financial 
responsibility. He has resolved or maintained all debts in current status except for one 
$1,178 SOR debt owed to a technical university. His efforts at debt resolution have 
established a “meaningful track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will 
maintain his financial responsibility and resolve his debt owed to the technical 
university.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to reinstate Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
