 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04209 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Elizabeth L. Newman, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s mitigating information is insufficient to fully overcome the foreign 
influence security concerns under Guideline B. He failed to establish that it is unlikely he 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his parents and 
the interest of the United States. He has lived in the United States for only six years. He 
has substantial liquid financial assets in the United States, but owns no property in the 
United States. His financial interests in the United States are outweighed by his property 
interests in Jordan. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The SOR was 
amended on March 2, 2015, adding a Guideline C (foreign preference) security 
concern.1 Applicant answered the SOR on November 20, 2014, and the amended SOR 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
allegation on March 10, 2015. (Appellate Exhibit 1) He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 
10, 2015, and reassigned to me on May 14, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 24, 2015, scheduling a hearing for 
May 15, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on May 27, 2015. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Applicant testified, presented three witnesses, and offered exhibits A through C. 
AE C was received post-hearing. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
GE 1 and 2, and AE A through C were admitted without objections. GE 3 is a request 
for me to take administrative notice of facts concerning the government of Jordan. GE 4 
is the Government’s discovery letter to Applicant. Both GE 3 and 4 were marked and 
attached to the record, but not admitted into evidence. Neither side objected, and I took 
administrative notice of facts concerning the government of Jordan outlined in the 
source documents and the administrative notice request.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. He denied 
SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor 
while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old senior program manager employed by a non-profit 
organization that does business with, or is sponsored by, U.S. endowments and 
organizations.  
 
Applicant’s father was born in what used to be Palestine territory, in an area that 
is now part of Israel. When Israel was created, his father was located in the West Bank, 
and was granted Jordanian citizenship. His father went to Russia to study, and married 
his mother, who was born in Russia. Applicant’s oldest sister was born in Russia, his 
second sister was born in Algeria, and his third sister was born in Jordan. Applicant’s 
father worked on his own business, and never served in the Jordanian military or had 
connections to the Jordanian government.  
 
Applicant’s mother left Russia at age 23. She only visited Russia once when she 
was 25 years old. She is currently 70 years old. She worked as a homemaker. His 
father is currently mentally ill, and his mother cares for his father. Applicant and his 
sisters provide financial support for their parents. Applicant sends his parents between 
$4,000 and $5,000 a year.  
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Jordan. His family is Christian, and 
he attended a Catholic high school. Applicant testified that he paid for his college 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
education by translating documents from English to Arabic. In 2004, he started working 
for non-profit organizations sponsored by U.S. endowments and organizations. He 
received his green card in 2006, and immigrated to the United States in 2009. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012. His current income is around $105,000. He 
does not own any property in the United States, but stated that his net worth in the 
Unites States is around $150,000 (investments and retirement accounts, and savings). 
 
Applicant’s current job requires him to travel frequently to the Middle East. He 
visits his parents every time he can. Because of his father’s illness, Applicant maintains 
daily contact with his mother via telephone and emails. Between 2009 and 2012, 
Applicant travelled to Jordan to visit his parents on eight different occasions. After 
submitting his 2013 SCA, Applicant travelled twice to Jordan. In early 2013, Applicant 
used his Jordanian passport to travel to Jordan for his convenience. In early 2015, he 
used his U.S. passport to travel.  
 
Applicant explained that he used his Jordanian passport to travel to Jordan 
because he was not aware of the security concerns it would raise. In March 2015, 
Applicant was made aware of the security concerns raised by his possession of a 
Jordanian passport, and he surrendered it to his facility security officer (FSO). His 
Jordanian passport expired in 2014, and he does not intend to renew it. 
 
In 2005, Applicant purchased an apartment in Jordan. He lived in the apartment 
from 2005 to 2009, and rented it from 2009 to 2011. He was not been able to rent it 
again because of the political turmoil in the area. He paid off the apartment mortgage in 
2013. Applicant estimates the current value of the apartment to be $200,000. He stated 
that he hired two different realtors to help him sell the property. He also used two 
Jordanian friends to help him sell the property without success. When Applicant was 
made aware of the security concerns raised by his possession of property in Jordan, he 
transferred the title of the apartment to his mother. Because his parents have no 
income, he is still financially responsible for the apartment taxes and other expenses. 
Applicant also has a Jordanian bank account. Apparently, he has less than $10,000 in 
the account because he no longer has to report it to the IRS. 
 
Applicant testified that his father’s siblings immigrated to the United States. His 
three sisters also immigrated to the United States, married U.S. citizens, and became 
naturalized U.S. citizens themselves. In 2009, Applicant and his siblings attempted to 
bring their parents to the United States, but it did not work out because of his father’s 
mental illness. He requires extensive medical care, and Jordan provides free elderly 
medical care. 
 
Applicant considers the United States his home, and he intends to retire here. He 
testified that he has no ties of loyalty toward Jordan, and his family has no historical 
connection with Jordan either because his mother was born in Russia and his father in 
Palestine. He averred that he has worked very hard and invested substantial resources 
to obtain his U.S. citizenship. Applicant has been in a stable relationship with a partner 
for more than four years. They have lived together since January 2015, and are 
integrating their financial resources. He prefers the United States over Jordan because 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of the financial opportunities available, the liberal U.S. political tradition, and the rights 
and privileges that he enjoys in the United States. Except for his elderly parents, he 
does not have any other close relatives living in Jordan. 
 
Applicant started working with his current employer in 2009. He is considered to 
be a successful and productive employee. He was promoted to a supervisory position 
and has received monetary awards. He is considered to be trustworthy, responsible, 
discrete, and conscientious about his responsibilities. His supervisor recommended his 
eligibility for a security clearance. 
  
I take administrative notice of the following facts: Jordan’s form of government is 
a constitutional monarchy ruled by a king. Jordan has continuing human rights problems 
and citizen unrest due to its inability to peaceably change its government, the 
mistreatment and allegations of torture by security and government officials, restrictions 
on freedom of expression and assembly, aggressive political factions and terrorist 
organizations, and violence against women. Other human rights problems are arbitrary 
deprivation of life, mistreatment of prisoners, poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, 
and other denials of due process. 
 
Societal and legal discrimination against Jordanians of Palestinian origin is 
widespread. Such persons are subject to arbitrary withdrawal of their citizenship without 
due process and exclusion from services such as access to public assistance, 
education, and medical services. 
 
  The threat of terrorism in Jordan is considered to be high because of past 
terrorist activities against U.S. and government of Jordan targets in Jordan. The 
government of Jordan considers U.S.-Jordanian dual nationals to be Jordanian citizens 
subject to Jordanian laws.  
 
The United States deeply values its long history of cooperation and friendship 
with Jordan, with which it established diplomatic relations in 1949. The United States 
appreciates the special leadership role that Jordan plays in advancing peace and 
moderation in the region. The United States and Jordan share the mutual goals of a 
comprehensive, just, and lasting peace in the Middle East and an end to violent 
extremism that threatens the security of Jordan, the region, and the entire globe. U.S. 
policy seeks to reinforce Jordan's commitment to peace, stability, and moderation. The 
United States has helped Jordan maintain its stability and prosperity through economic 
and military assistance and through close political cooperation. The United States 
encourages Jordanian efforts to continue to implement key political and economic 
reforms that will secure a better future for the Jordanian people.  
 
Policies 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
The guideline indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying AG ¶ 7 in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Jordan. The mere possession of 
close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country 
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone may be sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise 
of classified information.2  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and 
obligation with his parents. These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that Jordanian agents or 
individuals such as terrorists and criminals operating in Jordan may exploit the 
opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified information about the United States. 
Applicant’s relatives in Jordan create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both 
directly or through his parents in Jordan. 
 
Applicant has a substantial property interest in Jordan. The value of his 
apartment and bank account in Jordan are greater than his declared net worth in the 
United States. He pays the taxes on the apartment. 
 
  AG ¶¶ 7(a) - 7(c) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions. The Government produced substantial evidence 
raising potentially disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Jordan. He has worked for non-profit 
organizations doing business with or sponsored by U.S. endowments and organizations 
since 2004. He received his green card in 2006, and immigrated to the United States in 
2009. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012.  
 
Applicant has made the United States his home since 2009, and has been a 
productive U.S. citizen. He has strong affection and sense of obligation to his siblings 
living in the United States, and to his partner of four years with whom he has a stable 
relationship. He does not own any property in the United States, but has a net worth of 
around $150,000 (investment, retirement, and bank accounts). Applicant recently 
owned real state in Jordan valued at around $200,000, and maintains a Jordanian bank 
account with less than $10,000. He provided the apartment to his mother; however, he 
still pays the taxes on the apartment. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his parents living in Jordan. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Although there is no evidence that Jordanian government agents, or other entities, have 
approached or threatened Applicant or his parents living in Jordan, he is nevertheless 
potentially vulnerable to threats, coercion, inducement, and manipulation made against 
him or his parents living in Jordan. We cannot rule out such a possibility in the future. 
 
The threat of terrorism in Jordan is considered to be high. There is evidence of 
past terrorist activities against U.S. and government of Jordan targets in Jordan. It is 
possible that terrorists or criminals would attempt to coerce Applicant through his 
relatives living in Jordan, if they determined it was advantageous to do so. This places 
the burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his contacts in Jordan do not 
pose a security risk, and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to 
the United States and his connection to his parents. 
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Jordan’s form of government. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human-rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States.  
 
I note that the United States deeply values its long history of cooperation and 
friendship with Jordan. Notwithstanding, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 
at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. 
Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that it is unlikely he will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual and the 
interests of the United States. Applicant’s parents are residents and citizens of Jordan. 
He has frequent contact with his parents and visits them as frequently as he can. Since 
2009, he visited his parents ten times. If members of the community, terrorists, 
criminals, or corrupt government officials became aware of his work for U.S. interests 
and citizenship, his parents, friends, and extended relatives living in Jordan could be in 
danger or placed at unnecessary risk.  
 
Applicant’s contacts with his parents in Jordan create a heightened risk of foreign 
influence and exploitation. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
relatives living in Jordan who might be coerced by terrorists, criminals, or governmental 
entities in that country. 
 
Applicant professed that his loyalty and sense of obligation is to the United 
States. He averred that he has no loyalty to Jordan. Notwithstanding, his sense of 
obligation to his parents in Jordan is very strong. He has lived only six years in the 
United States, and owns no property here. On the other hand, Applicant recently 
transferred a $200,000 apartment in Jordan to his mother and his bank account that are 
more valuable than his financial and property interests are in the United States. 
 
I considered that Applicant unsuccessfully attempted to sell his apartment in 
Jordan, and that he then transferred ownership of the apartment to his mother. In light 
of his parents lack of income, and that they depend on Applicant and his siblings for 
their subsistence, I considered this transaction a strong manifestation of his affection for 
his mother and his obligation to her. Also, although his parents are elderly and retired, 
they still depend on the Jordanian government for their extensive medical care. 
 
The record evidence fails to support a determination that Applicant’s ties and 
sense of obligation to the United State are sufficiently strong that he could be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States, even under 
circumstances detrimental to his parents in Jordan.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the concerns about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012, and was issued a U.S. 
passport. He used his Jordanian passport, in preference of his U.S. passport, to travel 
to Jordan in 2013, after he became a U.S. citizen. He continued to use his Jordanian 
passport for his travel convenience. 
 
 Foreign preference disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a) is supported by the 
evidence. If this condition is not mitigated it would disqualify Applicant from eligibility to 
hold a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for foreign 
preference:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable. Applicant has expressed his willingness to 
renounce his Jordanian citizenship. His Jordanian passport is currently expired, and he 
surrendered his Jordanian passport to his FSO. Applicant testified he has no intention to 
renew his Jordanian passport. He mitigated the security concerns alleged under 
Guideline C. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered that Applicant has worked for non-profit organizations sponsored 
by U.S. endowments and organizations since 2004. He immigrated to the United States 
in 2009, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012. He has lived in the United 
States 6 years. Applicant has strong affection and a sense of obligation to his siblings 
and extended family members, and to his partner of four years, all of whom live in the 
United States.  
 
 Notwithstanding, considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s mitigating 
information taken together is insufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security 
concerns under Guideline B. Applicant’s evidence failed to establish that it is unlikely he 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his parents and 
the interest of the United States. He has lived in the United States for only six years. He 
has substantial liquid assets in the United States, but owns no property in the United 
States. His financial interests in the United States are outweighed by his property 
interests in Jordan. 
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not carried 
his burden of persuasion and the foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.c:     Against Applicant 
   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline C:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:       For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
