 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06241 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 26, 2014. On 
January 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 5, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 30, 2015, and 
the case was assigned to me on July 13, 2015. On July 28, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
August 24, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
 
2 
 
through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the 
testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open until September 9, 2015, to enable Applicant to 
submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX B, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 1, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old deck electrician employed by a defense contractor at a 
naval shipyard since April 2012. He graduated from high school in June 1999. He 
worked as an electrician in the private sector from June 1999 until he began his current 
job. He took online courses from a design and technology school from August 2007 to 
January 2008 but did not receive a degree. He received an employee recognition award 
from his current employer in July 2015. (AX A.) He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant married in April 2003. He and his wife have two children, ages 10 and 
2. He has a 16-year-old daughter from a previous relationship. He pays $350 per month 
in child support for his daughter, and his payments are current. (Tr. 39, 69.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife was employed as a business administrator in a nursing home 
until she was laid off in April 2015. She has been offered a job as a certified nursing 
assistant, and she has accepted the offer. (Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 Applicant took a substantial pay cut in 2010, when his hours were reduced from 
40 hours a week to 30-35 hours. He found a job in another state in August 2011, hoping 
to earn more, but he earned about $600 less per month than in his previous job. In April 
2012, he returned to his home state when he was offered his current job. (GX 1 at 10; 
Tr. 58-61.)  
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling about $22,000. The SOR is based 
on Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) from July 2014 (GX 3) and June 2015 (GX 
4). The evidence concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b: judgments for unpaid rent filed in December 2009 and 
December 2008 for $997 and $1,948.  Applicant paid $500 on August 24, 2015, and 
agreed to pay the balance in 49 monthly installments of $50. (AX B.) He testified that he 
and his wife terminated their lease early and incurred a penalty because they could not 
afford the rent. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: deficiency after repossession of car, charged off for $8,127 
(alleged as $7,877 in SOR). Applicant testified that he has contacted the creditor 
regarding a settlement of this debt, but has not yet reached an agreement. (Tr. 48.) He 
presented no documentation of his negotiations.  
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: delinquent car loan, charged off for $4,308. Applicant testified that 
he voluntarily surrendered this car because he could not afford the payments. He has 
not made any efforts to resolve this debt. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: delinquent loan, charged off for $1,969. In a personal subject 
interview (PSI) in September 2014, Applicant stated that this loan was for furniture. (GX 
2.) His July 2014 CBR reflects that the debt was for “household goods.” At the hearing, 
he testified that this debt was for Christmas presents and he was making payments on 
it. He submitted no documentation of payments. (Tr. 51-52.) His June 2015 CBR 
reflects four accounts with this lender, one of which is current and one of which was 
sold to another lender. (GX 4 at 5-6.) It appears that Applicant is making payments on 
another account with the same lender, but not the account alleged in the SOR. This 
debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: collection account for unpaid rent for $1,758. Applicant testified 
that he terminated this lease early when he moved from another state to accept his 
current job. He testified that he is making payments on this debt, but he submitted no 
documentation to support his testimony. (Tr. 53.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: delinquent credit-card account charged off for $1,002. Applicant 
testified that he has made no efforts to resolve this debt. (Tr. 54.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: delinquent utility bill charged off for $39. Applicant was unable to 
identify this debt at the hearing. (Tr. 54-55.) It is unresolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: delinquent telecommunications bill for $1,292. Applicant testified 
that this debt was incurred while he was living in the apartment involved in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
He testified that he contacted the creditor but had made no payments on this debt. (Tr. 
55.) Part of the debt was for unreturned equipment. Applicant returned the equipment, 
but he does not know how much of the debt was for unreturned equipment and early 
termination fees. (Tr. 75-77.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k: collection accounts for medical debt $662 and $244. 
Applicant testified that he did not recognize either debt. Both debts are for activity in 
2009. He testified that he and his family have not received medical care since 2006. (Tr. 
55-57.) He has not investigated the basis for the CBR entries. He has not disputed the 
debts with the original creditors, the collection agencies, or the credit reporting bureaus. 
(Tr. 73.) The debts are unresolved. 
 
 Applicant’s current take-home pay is about $3,300 per month. When his wife was 
working, her take-home pay was about $1,500 per month. Their net monthly remainder 
was about $1,000. Applicant has no savings. His current bills for living expenses are 
current. (Tr. 64-66.) He has not sought financial counseling or considered hiring a debt- 
consolidation or debt-resolution company. (Tr. 63-64, 71.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s father testified that Applicant was raised in a good home, has been a 
good son, and knows the value of hard work. He believes that Applicant made some 
bad financial decisions, but has learned that you need to pay yourself out of debt and 
not try to borrow your way out of debt. He believes that Applicant has learned from his 
mistakes. (Tr. 28-33.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s income reduction in 2010 was a 
circumstance largely beyond his control. His wife’s loss of employment also was largely 
beyond his control, but it occurred after the debts alleged in the SOR already were 
delinquent. He has not acted responsibly, because he took no significant actions to 
resolve his delinquent debts until he realized that they were an impediment to obtaining 
a security clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not sought or received financial 
counseling. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
Although Applicant began making payments on these debts after the hearing, his 
testimony reflected his intention to make a good-faith effort resolve his debts, and his 
payment plan for the two judgments is a first step in the right direction. This mitigating 
condition is not established for the remaining debts in the SOR, because Applicant has 
made no payments or payment agreements regarding them. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. At the hearing, Applicant questioned the validity of 
the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k. However, he had taken no action to 
verify them or dispute them. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
 
7 
 
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant began working as an electrician in high school and has worked 
continuously to the present. He was recently recognized for his accomplishments by his 
current employer. He was candid and sincere at the hearing. However, he is just 
beginning to resolve his financial problems, and he has not yet established a track 
record of financial responsibility. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
