KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: As Applicant acknowledges, a debt may be removed from a credit report for reasons
other than payment such as age.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04648.a1
DATE: 09/09/2015
DATE: September 9, 2015
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04648
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 29, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On June 25, 2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert J. Tuider denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military for twenty years and has been employed by the Defense
industry ever since his retirement.  He has worked for his present employer since 2012.  He “has
successfully held a security clearance since 1984.”  Decision at 2.  Applicant divorced his first wife
in 2006, remarrying in 2010.  
Applicant’s SOR lists eleven delinquent debts, for such things as credit cards, utility services,
medical expenses, cable services, etc.  He attributed his financial problems to the divorce.  He also
attributed them to the failure of three businesses that he and his former wife had owned, though he
provided no information about how or why these businesses failed.  Applicant claimed in his SOR
response that he had resolved his debts.  However, the only corroboration that he provided for this
assertion related to two of the eleven allegations.  Otherwise he submitted nothing showing his
efforts to resolve his financial problems.  The Judge noted that the File of Relevant Material
(FORM) had clearly stated that the evidence as it then existed was bereft of mitigating information
and that Applicant had 30 days in which to submit written matters setting forth objections, rebuttal,
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation.
The Judge noted Applicant’s assertion that his service in the military and in the Defense
industry evidenced honesty, trustworthiness, and honor.  Applicant also stated that his efforts to
settle his debts show that there should be no concern about his ability to protect classified
information.
The Judges’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems raised concerns under Guideline
F.  He resolved in Applicant’s favor the two debts that he had settled or paid.  However, regarding
the balance of the allegations, the Judge concluded that Applicant had submitted insufficient
evidence in mitigation.  Though noting that Applicant’s debts may have been affected by
circumstances outside his control, the Judge concluded that Applicant had failed to show that he had
acted responsibly to resolve them.  He also stated that Applicant provided no information about
payments he may have made, efforts to contact creditors, a credible dispute of any of the debts,
settlement negotiations, financial counseling, etc.  He stated that Applicant’s failure to demonstrate
3
“more substantial steps to resolve his debts” impugns his judgment. Decision at 7.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant had failed to demonstrate mitigation.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s military career and to the lack
of security violations in his record.  However, he concluded that the adverse evidence outweighed
the positive, given the lack of mitigating information.  
Discussion
Applicant argues that the record, viewed as a whole, does not show a history of failing to
meet his financial obligations.  We construe this as an argument that his circumstances do not raise
concerns under Guideline F.  The Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct
under any of the Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See. e.g., ISCR Case No.
11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 28, 2014).  When an applicant denies an allegation, the Government
must produce substantial evidence of the facts alleged.  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.  See ISCR Case No. 10-
00925 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 26, 2012).  In this case, Applicant admitted several of the allegations,
thereby relieving the Government of any burden of production regarding them.  In addressing those
allegations that Applicant had denied, the Government produced Applicant’s answers to DOHA
interrogatories (which included a summary of his clearance interview) as well as credit reports.
Credit reports themselves can often meet the Government’s substantial evidence burden.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 10-00925, supra, at 3.  In the case before us, Applicant’s admissions and the
Government’s exhibits are sufficient to constitute substantial evidence of the allegations of security
concern.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption of nexus, and the Judge did
not err in concluding that Applicant’s financial difficulties raise concerns about his judgment and
reliability, qualities essential to protecting classified information.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18.
Applicant argues that he submitted sufficient evidence in mitigation, noting that his response
to the SOR included pages from his credit report that, he believes, corroborate his claims of debt
resolution.  However, this argument consists principally of a challenge to the weight that the Judge
assigned to the evidence.  Given the record as a whole, we cannot say that the Judge mis-weighed
the evidence that Applicant submitted.  Among other things, and as Applicant’s own brief
acknowledges, a debt may be removed from a credit report for reasons other than payment, for
example, its age.  The Judge did not err in concluding that Applicant had failed to provide enough
of meaningful debt resolution to justify a favorable conclusion.  
Applicant’s citation to his favorable evidence, such as his military service and good security
record, is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 28, 2014).  Although an absence of
prior security violations is a matter that a Judge should consider, along with all the other evidence
in the record, it does not preclude a Judge from concluding that an applicant’s circumstances present
security concerns that the applicant failed to mitigate.  The Government does not have to wait until
an applicant has compromised or mishandled classified information before it can deny the applicant
a clearance.  Even those with good prior records can encounter circumstances in which their
judgment and reliability might be compromised.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App.
4
Bd. Nov. 7, 2013);  Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D. C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S.
1039 (1970).  In pressing his arguments on appeal, Applicant has included matters that are not
contained in the record.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
