 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03165 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 25, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Based on a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial Considerations. His request 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
 
2 
 
administrative judge on March 2, 2015, and then reassigned to me on June 11, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 
8, 2015, scheduling the hearing for August 6, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 14, 2015. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. 
On August 11, 2015, Applicant presented additional exhibits marked AE G through AE I. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE G through AE I and they were admitted. 
The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer for the past five years. He is married to his second wife. He has one adult 
daughter from his first marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be indebted to the Federal 
government for a tax lien entered against him in 2011 in the approximate amount of 
$120,640. Applicant denied this debt, with explanations. This debt is found in the credit 
reports entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 
4; GE 5.) 
  
 Prior to his position with his current employer, Applicant worked in a job that 
required him to travel abroad for long periods of time. In 2006 Applicant was abroad for 
work shortly after he and his first wife sold their residence and incurred a substantial, 
taxable profit from its sale. He had sufficient funds in his bank account to resolve the tax 
incurred from the sale. He also took deductions for work done to the house prior to its 
sale. He did not have the ability to monitor his bank account abroad and did not know 
that his then-wife drained his entire account through nefarious activities that eventually 
led to her arrest. Applicant separated from his wife after he returned from abroad. He 
lost the documentation of the deductions during the process. They were audited and 
found to owe the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) approximately $250,000. Their divorce 
was not finalized until November 2010. His wife was ordered to pay 50% of the tax 
liabilities as part of their divorce decree, but she has not done so. Applicant was left to 
resolve the resulting tax obligations on his own. (AE C; Tr. 26-31, 43.) 
 
 Applicant hired a tax advisor to help him negotiate with the IRS. In 2010 he 
applied for, and received, limited innocent spouse relief, due to some of his then-wife’s 
criminal activities and the resulting tax consequences. However, he was found to owe 
approximately $120,640 with fines and fees for the 2006 through 2009 tax years, largely 
attributable to the profits from the sale of his prior residence and the lack of 
documentation to support deductions. A lien was filed against him for $120,640 in 2011. 
His IRS transcripts reflect Applicant continued to negotiate with the IRS and established 
an installment agreement to resolve his Federal tax debts for tax years 2006 through 
2009 through monthly payments of $550. He has been making the agreed upon monthly 
 
3 
 
payment to the IRS in a timely manner since April 2013. His Federal tax liability has 
decreased to $78,599.60. The majority of his debt is for the 2006 tax year, although he 
also owed approximately $3,000 for both 2008 and 2009. He has fully resolved his tax 
obligation for 2007. He intends to continue to make payments to the IRS on his debt 
until this debt is resolved. (AE B; AE C; AE D; AE F; AE G; AE I; Tr. 37-58.)  
 
 In addition to his Federal tax obligation, Applicant incurred delinquent state tax 
obligations through his ex-wife’s nefarious activities. In 2014 he fully resolved a $44,781 
tax liability owed to his state tax authority for the tax years 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2011. 
(AE C; AE E; Tr. 32.) 
 
 Applicant lives frugally so that he can resolve his tax issues. He and his current-
wife reside in a one-room studio apartment. His August 2015 credit report reflects no 
consumer credit delinquencies. He testified that his ex-wife left him with substantial 
debt, but that he was dedicated to resolving it. He increased his credit score to 750, 
from his low (as a result of his ex-wife’s spending) of 350. His landlord considers him to 
be a good tenant and noted he pays rent on time. (AE A; Tr. 33, 37-38.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by those that know him. He is known by his friends 
and colleagues to be kind, honest, and forthright. His annual performance ratings reflect 
he “exceeds” or “far exceeds” all requirements. He has received numerous certificates 
in recognition of his exceptional on the job performance. (AE H.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2006 when his then wife 
spent all of the proceeds from the sale of their prior residence, unbeknownst to 
Applicant. Their tax debts increased and accrued interest and penalties through 2012. 
 
5 
 
The evidence raises security concerns under both of these conditions, thereby shifting 
the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
  Three Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on delinquencies that result from events that an applicant 
could not control. Several events affected Applicant’s ability to maintain financial 
solvency, including his then-wife’s nefarious activities, her excessive spending spree, 
and his divorce. These events made it difficult for Applicant to address his Federal 
income tax liabilities for 2006 through 2009. However since 2011, Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances by addressing his tax liabilities in a responsible 
manner. He first negotiated with the IRS for innocent spouse tax relief. When he was 
found to have remaining unresolved tax issues after innocent spouse tax relief was 
applied, he began repaying his Federal tax liability under an agreement with the IRS. He 
has consistently made payments on that agreement for over two years. His delinquent 
tax obligation has decreased during the past two years from approximately $120,640 to 
$78,599.60. While he has a long way to go to fully resolving his Federal tax obligation, 
he credibly testified that he is committed to fully resolving this obligation, as he did his 
state income tax obligation for the same period. He lives frugally in a one-room studio, 
in order to have funds to repay his Federal tax obligation. Under the circumstances, he 
is acting responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
Applicant sought financial guidance and counseling about how to handle the 
debts from a tax advisor that helped him file for innocent spouse relief. Applicant 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay his debt through payments and his Federal tax debt 
is under control. It is consistently being repaid in accordance with his installment 
agreement. Moreover, Applicant is incurring no additional delinquent debt of any nature. 
Applicant brought his financial situation under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
financial difficulties were caused by factors that were beyond his control. He is an 
honorable man and has diligently worked over the past several years to pay his tax 
debts. He resolved his state tax obligation and has a history of making regular 
payments under his installment agreement. He lives frugally. He does not have any 
delinquent consumer accounts. It is unlikely that Applicant will incur future financial 
problems. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person analysis for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
