 
 
 
 
1 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03369 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted insufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On August 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on September 8, 2014. 
 
In a response to the SOR, dated September 22, 2014, Applicant admitted 34 of 
35 of the allegations raised. He also requested a determination based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. On April 6, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) that contained eight attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM within the 30 days provided. The case was assigned to me on September 
17, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old defense contractor who has worked for the same 
employer since 2013. He came to his present position after a period of unemployment 
lasting from late 2011 until early 2013. He earned a high school diploma and attended 
some college. He divorced in 2000. His two children reside with his ex-wife.  
 
At issue are 35 delinquent accounts amounting to approximately $39,593 in 
delinquent debt. Applicant admits all the debts except for one, at SOR allegation 1.g for 
$1,123. He wrote that he denies this entry because he opened the telecommunication 
account for his nephew, who irresponsibly did not pay its bills when due. Applicant did 
not comment on the other enumerated accounts. Rather, he submitted a brief letter 
explaining his situation.  
 
In his September 2014 letter, Applicant attributed his financial distress to not 
having “had a consistent work ethic, work has become hard to find and has caused 
[him] a great deal of [e]xpenses” that he has not paid. (FORM, Item 3, Response to the 
SOR, Letter of Sep. 22, 2014). Despite a desire to meet his obligations, he is unable to 
do so. He knows he can be a responsible citizen and, with sufficient income, be able to 
honor his debts. He plans on entering into a program to help him address his delinquent 
debts. He referenced this same program as being something he hoped to utilize when 
he was interviewed by investigators in April 2013. (FORM, Item 6 at 3) He provided no 
documentary evidence indicating any attempt to work with the cited program.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
 
 
 
3 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant incurred 
close to $40,000 in delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke two financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
There is no evidence of any progress on the numerous debts at issue, nor is 
there evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that any of the debts are the result of unforeseeable 
circumstances or emergencies, or that Applicant acted reasonably in the face of such 
circumstances. At best, it may be argued that his ability to address some or all of his 
delinquent debts was attributable to his period of unemployment from late 2011 until 
early 2013. There is, however, no evidence Applicant acted reasonably at the time in 
terms of his situation and his debt. At most, AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part. However, with no 
realistic strategy for addressing these debts in place, and no indication of progress on 
the debts, none of the available financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old defense contractor who has worked for the same 
employer since 2013. He experienced a period of unemployment lasting from late 2011 
until early 2013. He has attended some college. Divorced, Applicant is the father of two 
children. 
 
 
 
 
5 
At issue are numerous debts amounting to nearly $40,000. Applicant had a 
significant period of unemployment which lasted from late 2011 until early 2013. He told 
an interviewer in 2013 that he intended to enroll in a certain debt reduction program. As 
of September 2014, when he responded to the SOR, Applicant still expressed his 
intention to use that program. No evidence was provided in response to the April 2015 
FORM showing that he had yet enrolled in this program. Sufficient time has passed 
since his period of unemployment to enroll in this program or devise and implement 
some other strategy for addressing his delinquent debts. Absent some documentary 
evidence of a reasonable plan to manage his debts or some indication that his debt is 
being addressed or is now under control, I find financial considerations security 
concerns remain unmitigated.     
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.ii:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
