 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01717 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. In 2005, he filed for bankruptcy 
protection. The only delinquent obligation he has had since his debts were discharged 
was the result of a home purchase. The financial consideration security concerns have 
been mitigated. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 6, 2014, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations 
security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On September 12, 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On March 25, 2015, I was 
assigned the case. On April 25, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing convened on May 4, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
A and B were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The record 
was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. No additional material 
was received. On May 12, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the two SOR allegations. He 
admitted being past due on a mortgage that was in foreclosure and admitted to filing for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2005. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old who has done training and surveillance for a defense 
contractor since February 2014. (Tr. 49) He seeks to obtain a security clearance. For 
the period from February to August 2014, his gross pay, before taxes, was $32,000. His 
wife’s annual pay is $49,000 as a teacher. (Tr. 50) From November 1987 through 
November 1990, he honorably served in the U.S. Navy separating as a petty officer 
third class (E-4). (Tr. 33) He then served in the active reserve until November 1991, 
when he was medically discharged. (Ex. 1) While in the reserve he received a 
Meritorious Service Medal. (Tr. 33) 
 
Supervisors and coworkers state Applicant is responsible, industrious, motivated, 
dedicated, mature, intelligent, well-organized, and has exemplary performance. (Ex. A, 
BA) He has received numerous letters of appreciation and certificates of achievement. 
(Ex. B) 
 
 After leaving active duty, Applicant went back to school and obtained his 
teaching degree. (Tr. 34) He was initially unable to find a teaching position. (Tr. 34) He 
eventually obtained a teaching job in a different state and had a second, part-time job. 
(Tr. 35) However, his then-wife was not happy with the location, and they moved to 
another state where he obtained his Class A truck-driving certificate and went to work 
as a truck driver. (Tr. 35) He was also taking classes towards a master’s degree. With 
his job, he was on the road for a week or two at a time. (Tr. 36) When he returned 
home, he noticed the bills were not being paid to the point that the water was shut off. 
(Tr. 36) 
 
 In August 2001, Applicant obtained a teaching position. (Tr. 37) His wife refused 
to go to the new location, filed for divorce, and a protracted and expensive child custody 
battle commenced. (Ex. A, Tr. 37) Applicant gained full custody of his son. (Tr. 38) 
 
 
3 
 
 In June 2005, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (Ex. 3) In 2005, 
his debts were discharged. At the time of filing, he had a 10-year-old pickup truck,2 his 
wife’s vehicle was four years old, and they owned a 13-year old mobile home. (Ex. 4) 
When they filed, both Applicant and his wife were teachers with a combined monthly 
income of $4,700, which equaled their monthly expenditures. (Ex. 4) Their assets were 
$25,000 and their liabilities were approximately $174,000, of which approximately 
$33,000 was for student loans. (Ex. 4) 
 
 Following bankruptcy, Applicant’s financial problems continued when his second 
wife, who he had married in 2003 became sick and required numerous surgeries. (Tr. 
40) In July 2006, a year after the bankruptcy, he purchased a $345,000 home with a 
$276,000 first mortgage and a $69,000 second mortgage, both were with the same 
lender and both were for a 30-year term. (Ex. 2, Tr. 41) Repayment terms required him 
to make $2,332 monthly payments on the first mortgage and $733 monthly payments on 
the second mortgage. (Ex. 3) The mortgage was “paid as agreed.” In June 2008, when 
the mortgage was purchased by another lender, his monthly mortgage payment 
dropped from $3,055 to $2,708. In February 2009, his monthly mortgage payment 
dropped to $2,497, when the mortgage was sold to another mortgage company. This 
account was also paid as agreed. In July 2012, his payment dropped to $2,168. (Ex. 3) 
As the monthly mortgage payment dropped by approximately $900 per month, the 
mortgage balance increased by approximately $66,000. (Ex. 3)  
 
 Until the spring of 2013, Applicant made all of his mortgage payments in a timely 
manner. When the home was first purchased, he had a second job as a shuttle driver 
making $160 to $300 a day two or three times a week. (Tr. 43) His part-time job ended 
when his friend, the company’s owner, died of a heart attack. (Tr. 44) For seven years, 
starting in 2006, Applicant received only one pay increase. (Tr. 42) During this period, 
his wife was working as a teacher and had a second job as a tutor. (Tr. 53)  
  
 Applicant states he purchased his home “at the exact wrong time” and was 
caught in the fall of the housing market. (Tr. 43) The mortgage was being paid, but he 
requested the mortgage company to lower the monthly payment. (Tr. 45) He was told 
he did not qualify for an adjustment because his mortgage payments were current. (Tr. 
45) During the eight years they owned the house, the neighborhood deteriorated. (Tr. 
48) Additionally, the home was burglarized and had mold. (Ex. B, Tr. 48, 54) Following 
foreclosure of the $345,000 house, it is on the market for $147,000 and has not sold. 
(Ex. B, Tr. 46)  
 
In the summer of 2013, Applicant moved from the house, but continued to pay 
the electrical and water utility bills until April 2014. (Tr. 46, 51) Mold in the home had 
adverse effects on his wife’s asthma. (Tr. 46) He offered a deed in lieu of foreclosure 
and also a short sale, but the lender was unreceptive. (Tr. 46) He has received no 
communication from the lender since vacating the home. (Tr. 53) 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant stated he is still driving the same vehicle as he had at the time of the bankruptcy, it is now 15 
years old, and his current wife’s vehicle is six or seven year old. (Tr. 43, 57) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s teaching job ended when he was unable to pay the annual $1,300 to 
$1,500 cost of continuing education courses required to keep his teaching certificate. 
(Tr. 48) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. In June 2005, he had to seek 
bankruptcy protection. In 2005 his debts were discharged and in 2006 he purchased a 
home. Changes in the real estate market resulted in the home’s fair market value 
decreasing to less than half of its purchase price. Applicant has been unsuccessful in 
his attempts to reach a settlement agreement on the house, and he has not occupied 
the home since 2013. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In July 2006, Applicant purchased a home at what he described as “at the exact 
wrong time” and was caught in the falling housing market. Through April 2013, all 
mortgage payments were timely made. His good credit allowed him to refinance the 
home each time reducing his monthly mortgage payment. His monthly payments 
dropped approximately $900 while he held the mortgage on the house; however, the 
amount of the mortgage increased by $66,000.  
 
Applicant and his wife were teachers. They received no pay increases for seven 
years. They were able to meet their financial obligations because each had a part-time 
job. He was a shuttle bus driver, and she was a tutor. Applicant was involved in a 
protracted custody battle over his son. Additionally, his current wife required numerous 
surgical procedures. In 2013, he could no longer make his monthly payments and 
approached the mortgage company for help. He was told that since the mortgage was 
being timely paid he did not qualify for a payment adjustment. The mortgage company 
would not lower the monthly payment.  
 
During the eight years Applicant owned the house, the neighborhood 
deteriorated. Additionally, the home was burglarized. Following foreclosure of the 
$345,000 house, it is on the market for $147,000, a 60 percent decrease in value, and 
still has not sold. Even after vacating the home in the summer of 2013, he continued to 
pay the electrical and water utility bills on the property until April 2014. Mold in the home 
had adverse effects on his wife’s asthma, which added to their need to vacate the 
home. The lender was unresponsive to his offer of a deed in lieu of foreclosure and 
attempts for a short sale. 
 
 In June 2005,when Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection he had a 
10-year-old pickup truck, and his wife’s vehicle was four years old. They owned a 13-
year old mobile home. They were not living beyond their means. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s only financial problem during the past 10 years 
relates to the home he purchased. This is a single delinquent obligation. For seven 
years after purchasing the home, he was able to timely pay his mortgage. His credit 
history was sufficient that he was able to reduce his monthly mortgage payment by 
$900. When his part-time position as a shuttle bus driver ended, he was no longer able 
to make his mortgage payments. He acted reasonably by staying in contact with the 
mortgage company. He was unsuccessful in his attempts to reach a settlement on the 
property by his offer of deed in lieu of foreclosure and short sale. The loss of the home 
is an event unlikely to recur and his actions with relation to that foreclosure do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
After leaving the Air Force, he went to school and obtained his teaching degree. 
However, his then-wife did not want to live where Applicant had obtained his teaching 
position. He moved to another state and obtained a commercial driver’s license. As a 
truck driver he was gone for weeks at-a-time and when he returned home he found the 
bills were not being paid. When he obtained another teaching position, his wife did not 
wish to move and filed for divorce, which commenced a protracted child custody battle. 
He had remarried prior to his 2005 bankruptcy, but following the bankruptcy his financial 
problems continued when his new wife became sick and needed numerous surgeries. 
The falling real estate market, the burglary, and the mold in the house all contributed to 
his vacating the home. These factors (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) are largely beyond 
his control. Additionally, he has acted reasonably. Even after surrendering possession 
of the home, he continued to pay the utility bills. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is $32,000 and his wife’s salary is $49,000. Together 
their household income of $81,000 is sufficient to meet their current financial 
obligations. There are no other delinquent accounts. There are clear indications that his 
finances are under control. AG & 20(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In the past ten years, since 
Applicant’s debts were discharged in bankruptcy, he has had only a single delinquent 
debt, which was related to the purchased of his home. Until April 2013, Applicant met 
his financial obligations in a timely manner and was able to lower his monthly payments 
by $900. The loss of his part-time job, a 60% decline in fair market value of the home, 
the burglary, and mold contributed to Applicant returning the home to the lender. The 
single, delinquent obligation is not the type that indicates poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Money was not spent 
frivolously.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge  
