 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04573  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his access to 
classified information. Before becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant exercised 
the benefits extended to him as a result of his British National Overseas (BNO) status 
and his birth in Hong Kong. His BNO passport expired in January 2014. Applicant 
surrendered both his foreign passport and his Hong Kong identification card to his 
facility security officer (FSO) in early 2014. However, he failed to mitigate the foreign 
influence concerns raised by his relationships with his parents and three siblings who 
are residents of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) of the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence and foreign 
preference guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on April 17, 2015. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on June 8, 2015. He did not respond. 
The items appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4. The case was assigned to me on August 3, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
  
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about the PRC, including the HKSAR. Applicant did not object to the 
request, and it was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, works as a senior information technology engineer and developer 
at a prestigious U.S. university where he has been employed since 2007. This is his first 
application for a security clearance.2  
 
Applicant was born in Hong Kong in the 1970s while it was a part of the United 
Kingdom. From 1842 to June 30, 1997, Hong Kong was a British colony. Those born in 
Hong Kong during this time were considered British subjects. On July 1, 1997, Hong 
Kong reverted to Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of the 
People’s Republic of China. As an SAR, Hong Kong maintains some autonomy from the 
PRC, which the United States supports under the “one country, two systems” 
framework. However, the PRC maintains authority on foreign relations and national 
defense. The PRC has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party. The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses 
political dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced 
confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners. The PRC actively engages in acts 
of industrial espionage against the United States.3 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in March 1996 to complete college, 
receiving his bachelor’s degree in 1998. In 2006, Applicant began attending graduate 
school at the same university where he is currently employed. He earned his master’s 
degree in 2011. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 2012. Before 
becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant traveled abroad and entered the United States using 
a BNO passport issued by the United Kingdom in 2004.  He also held a Hong Kong 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 3.  
 
3 
 
Identification Card issued by the HKSAR in 2009. The documents expire in January 
2014 and January 2019, respectively. In addition to obtaining the Hong Kong 
identification card, Applicant also received a $700 tax rebate from the HKSAR 
government in 2012.4 In the beginning of 2014, Applicant surrendered his British 
Passport and Hong Kong Identification Card to his FSO. Since obtaining a U.S. 
passport in January 2013, he has used it exclusively while traveling abroad. He has not 
accepted any benefits from the HKSAR since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. On 
his December 2013 security clearance application, Applicant indicated that he is a dual 
citizen of Hong Kong, by birth, and the United States, by naturalization. He also 
expressed his willingness to renounce any foreign citizenship.5 
 
In addition to this citizenship status, Applicant disclosed relatives who are 
residents and citizens of a foreign country. Applicant’s parents and his three older 
sisters were born in mainland China. The family has lived in Hong Kong since at least 
1967 when Applicant’s older sister, now deceased, was born. Applicant’s mother does 
not work outside the home. His father is a retired business man, who retains part 
ownership of an export company. One of Applicant’s sisters, the one closest in age to 
Applicant, works at their father’s company. Applicant talks with his parents and sister on 
the phone between once and three times each month, depending on their schedules. 
He also communicates with them using a popular social media site. Applicant’s older 
two sisters work as a housewife and primary school teacher, respectively. He talks to 
these sisters less often, but visits with them whenever he is in Hong Kong.6  
 
In addition to his family members residing in Hong Kong, Applicant disclosed on 
his security clearance application, 74 other foreign contacts, from a variety a countries, 
including Hong Kong and China. A majority of the listed contacts are individuals 
Applicant met while living in the United States. In discussing his foreign contacts during 
his April 2014 subject interview, Applicant stated that he did not have close and 
continuing contact with the majority of the listed individuals. His contact with them is 
limited to occasional messages on a popular social media site. The interview did not 
reveal any specific foreign contacts with whom Applicant maintains a close relationship 
or frequent contact.7  
 
Applicant provided little information about his ties to the United States. He owns 
a home that he continues to share with his ex-wife, who is also a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 The SOR also alleges, based on Applicant’s disclosure in his security clearance application, that he 
received a $900 tax rebate from the HKSAR in 2013. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that 
he was mistaken. Accordingly, this allegation is decided in Applicant’s favor. 
 
5 GE 1-2. 
 
6  GE 2. 
 
7 GE 1-2, 4. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Security concerns involving foreign preference arise when an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States.8 
The SOR alleges that Applicant exercises dual citizenship with the United States and 
Hong Kong. This is inaccurate as Hong Kong is not a country unto itself, but a province 
that during Applicant’s lifetime has been controlled by the United Kingdom and the PRC. 
The question of citizenship and nationality as it pertains to residents of Hong Kong is 
complicated. The resolution of which involves a consideration of the citizenship and 
nationality laws of both the United Kingdom and the PRC, the “one country, two 
systems” policy adopted by the United States, as well as Applicant’s acts of self-
determination. Applicant was born a British subject and considered a British National 
Overseas by the United Kingdom – a status that does not come with the full rights or 
privileges of British citizenship.  After the colony reverted to Chinese sovereignty in 
1997, it appears that Applicant chose to retain that status as evidenced by his obtaining 
a BNO passport in 2004. 
 
The PRC does not recognize the British Overseas National status for residents of 
the HKSAR. Nor, does the PRC recognize dual citizenship. Once a PRC citizen takes 
steps, as did Applicant, to obtain any foreign citizenship he loses his Chinese 
citizenship and must take affirmative steps to obtain it. However, by virtue of his birth in 
Hong Kong, Applicant was entitled to possess a Hong Kong identification card and 
receive certain benefits from the Hong Kong government.  The receipt of these benefits 
is not an exercise or attempt to gain Chinese citizenship. 
 
  Ultimately, Applicant’s receipt of benefits from the United Kingdom and the 
HKSAR, as alleged in the SOR, is neither disqualifying nor indicative of a foreign 
preference because they occurred before Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
October 2012. Since obtaining U.S. citizenship, Applicant has not accepted benefits 
from another country or acted in any way that indicates a foreign preference for another 
country over the United States. Applicant travels exclusively using his U.S. passport. He 
surrendered his foreign-issued documents to his FSO. Furthermore, he has expressed 
a willingness to renounce any foreign citizenship. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”9 The SOR alleges that 
Applicant’s parents and siblings are residents of the HKSAR. The SOR also alleges that 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 9. 
 
9 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant maintains frequent contacts with friends who are residents of the HKSAR and 
some who are citizens of the PRC.  
 
While the mere possession of close ties with foreign family members or friends is 
not disqualifying as a matter of law, a close relationship with even one person living in a 
foreign country is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. A close relationship with a 
person who is a resident and citizen of a foreign country can be disqualifying if the 
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure or coercion; or if the relationship could create a potential conflict of interest 
between the applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology, and his 
desire to help a foreign person.10 In completing this calculus, evaluating the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
is essential. 
 
The record does not support a finding that Applicant’s friendships with foreign 
nationals create any security risk. Aside from the mere existence of contacts, the 
Government did not provide any evidence to indicate any close ties to any particular 
friends who are foreign nationals. However, the same cannot be said about Applicant’s 
relationships with his parents and siblings who are residents of the HKSAR, with whom 
Applicant maintains close and continuing contact. Given the treatment of the PRC 
toward its residents, as well as the country’s reputation for being an active collector of 
U.S. economic intelligence, these relationships create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, and coercion. 11  
 
 Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate this concern. His 
relationships with his parents and siblings cannot be considered minimal, casual or 
infrequent. Furthermore, he did not present sufficient information about his relatives in 
the HKSAR to support a finding that it is unlikely that he will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between foreign interests and those of the United States. Also, 
Applicant failed to present evidence of ties to the United States to support a finding that  
he could be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of U.S. interests.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet 
his burdens of production and persuasion. The security concerns raised in the SOR 
remain. Following Egan12 and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in 
favor of protecting national security.  
 
                                                          
10 AG ¶¶ 7(a) – (b). 
 
11 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
12 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.c – 2.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.                                              
 
 
 
______________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
