 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05614 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, Department of 
Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 
9, 2015, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 
1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.  
 
On March 25, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 21, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 11. On June 7, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply 
additional information. Applicant timely submitted a response to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on July 31, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 2014. In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that allegation. His admission is 
incorporated as findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee who has been working for a defense 
contractor since January 2007. He also worked for that contractor from January 2003 to 
November 2006 when he was laid off for two months. He completed a technical school 
in 2007 and an online school in 2008. He has been married since October 2004. He has 
an eight-year-old child. He has held a security clearance since 2003.2 
 
 In his SCA, Applicant listed seven delinquent credit card debts totaling $62,371. 
He indicated that he had hired a debt consolidation agency (DCA) and established a 
repayment arrangement to resolve those debts.3  
 
 In an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview dated May 8, 2013, 
Applicant indicated that his financial problems started in August 2006 when he 
purchased a house. Due to a downturn in the economy, he was unable to sell his 
previous house and encountered difficulties renting it. He paid both mortgages (totaling 
$3,800 per month) from August 2006 to November 2011. He used credit cards to assist 
in meeting his financial obligations. He made minimum payments on the credit cards to 
keep them current. After he started renting his previous home in November 2011, he 
contacted the DCA to obtain assistance in resolving the credit card debt. The DCA was 
not a credit counseling service. The DCA advised him to stop making payments on the 
credit card debts until it finalized the consolidation process. In November 2011, he 
stopped making the payments. In February 2012, he started making monthly payments 
of $646 to the DCA. At the time of the OPM interview, he indicated that he had made all 
of the DCA payments on time. His last payment was scheduled for November 2016. He 
provided no proof of the payments toward the debt consolidation program.4  
 
                                                          
1 Item 1 
 
2 Item 11.  
 
3 Item 5.  
 
4 Item 11.   
 
 
3 
 
 
 In December 2014, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He received financial 
counseling to file bankruptcy. His bankruptcy petition reflected that he had $422,894 in 
assets and $474,307 in liabilities. His creditors held secured claims totaling $442,789 
and unsecured, nonpriority claims totaling $31,518. His current monthly income was 
listed as $5,970 and his current expenditures were $6,637. His debts were discharged 
in March 2015.5 
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant stated that, soon after his OPM 
interview, a creditor obtained a garnishment of $200 against his wages and put a lien on 
one of his homes. He indicated that the DCA was of “little to no help” in responding to 
the garnishment. His tenant fell behind on the rent and he had to evict him. His financial 
problems caused a strain on his marriage and led to him and his wife separating. He 
moved into his prior residence. He tried to do a short sale of the property, but received 
no offers after lowering the price four times. He consulted with an attorney who advised 
him to stop paying the DCA and recommended that he file bankruptcy. His attorney 
informed him that the DCA was being investigated for criminal activity. In his Response 
to the FORM, he indicated that he had an offer on one of the properties and was 
seeking to dispose of that property through a short sale.6 
  
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
                                                          
5 Item 7. 
 
6 Item 11; Applicant’s Response to the FORM.  
 
 
4 
 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
 In 2006, Applicant purchased a new home. Due to a downturn in the economy, 
he was unable to sell or rent his previous home. He paid the mortgages on both 
properties. He struggled financially and used credit cards to cover living expenses. 
When he was able to rent his prior residence in 2011, he hired a DCA to assist him in 
resolving his debts. He had been making the minimum payments on the credit cards 
until the DCA advised him to stop making the payments until the debt consolidation 
process was finalized. He paid into the debt consolidation program until a creditor 
garnished his pay. He sought legal advice, learned the DCA he hired was under 
investigation, and filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His debts were discharged in March 2015.  
 
 Applicant never ignored his delinquent debts. He consistently took steps to 
resolve them. His financial situation has stabilized. He has acted in a responsible 
manner in handling his debts. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
My comments under Guideline F are incorporated in this whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some 
warrant additional comment. Applicant encountered financial difficulties and attempted 
to resolve them through a debt consolidation program. When his ability to make the debt 
consolidation payments was negatively impacted through a wage garnishment, he 
resolved the debts through bankruptcy. He has acted responsibly in handling his debts. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to his eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant mitigated the security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
