 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02797 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 8, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
                                                          
1
 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated October 8, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Involvement), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a notarized statement, dated February 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
mailed to Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on July 9, 
2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the 
FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In 
addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the 
Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on July 13, 2015. 
Applicant’s response was due on August 12, 2015, but to date, no response has been 
received. The case was assigned to me on September 18, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to drug involvement in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). Applicant’s admissions 
and other comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a test engineer with his current employer since April 2012.3 He worked for 
other employers in similar positions since May 2005.4 A May 2003 high school 
graduate, Applicant received an associate’s degree in May 2005 and a bachelor’s 
degree in an unspecified discipline in May 2012.5 He was a missionary for his church 
from September 2005 until April 2006.6 He has never served in the U.S. military.7 
Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in October 2012.8 He was married in 
August 2009.9 Applicant has one daughter.10 
                                                          
2
 Item 1 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated February 3, 2015). 
 
3 Item 2, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
4
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 13-14. 
 
5
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 11-12. 
 
6
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 14-15. 
 
7
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
8
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 39-40. 
 
9
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 18-19. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement  
 
Applicant is a substance abuser whose choice of substances was identified by 
Applicant as “THC, such as marijuana, weed, pot, hashish, etc.”11 He smoked marijuana 
in cigarettes and pipes from September 2012 until September 2013. Applicant’s 
expressed reasons and justifications for doing so have been inconsistent. He initially 
indicated that he smoked marijuana for a variety of general reasons including 
recreation, social, and as a sleep remedy.12 On occasions, he used it to relax while 
“hanging out” with friends whose names he could or would not recall.13 On other 
occasions, he smoked marijuana “in the presence . . . [of] his spouse.”14 In his Answer 
to the SOR, Applicant’s stated reasons changed dramatically.  He explained that he had 
difficulty sleeping at night and wanted to move on from over-the-counter remedies and 
did not wish to consume prescription sleep-aids. A friend suggested he try marijuana. 
He did, and it helped.15 He also stated: “I never used it recreationally and it only aided in 
my ability to occasionally get a good night’s rest.”16 During his period of marijuana 
abuse, Applicant purchased approximately $300 worth of marijuana from an online 
source.17 Applicant estimated that he smoked marijuana approximately two times per 
month.18 As noted above, Applicant held a secret security clearance during the period of 
his marijuana abuse.19 
 
In December 2013, Applicant stated that his last use of marijuana occurred in 
September of that year, and that because of the impending birth of his child, “as well as 
the opportunity to work on a federal contract requiring a security clearance,” he stopped 
using marijuana, and he has no intent to use it in the future.20 He “denied ever being 
dependent on/or abusing marijuana.”21  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
10
 In his e-QIP, and during his interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), Applicant indicated that he anticipated the birth of a child in 2014. Item 2, supra note 1, at 38; Item 3 
(Personal Subject Interview, dated December 23, 2013), at 2. In his Answer to the SOR, he acknowledged having a 
daughter. Item 1, supra note 2. 
 
11
 Marijuana is classified as a controlled substance under schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970 (21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq.). Item 2, supra note 1, at 37. 
 
12
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 37-38; Item 3, supra note 10, at 1-2. 
 
13
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 37; Item 3, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
14
 Item 3, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
15
 Item 1, supra note 2. 
 
16
 Item 1, supra note 2. See for example, Applicant’s statement that “the nature of the use was merely 
recreational. . . .” Item 2, supra note 1, at 38. 
 
17
 Item 3, supra note 10, at 2. 
 
18
 Item 3, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
19
 Item 1, supra note 2. 
 
20
 Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
21
 Item 1, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
4 
                                      
 
There is no evidence that Applicant ever received any medical treatment or 
counseling related to the substance abuse. He claims he no longer associates with 
other substance abusers.22 
 
Because Applicant did not furnish evidence of his work performance or character, 
either through character references or by performance appraisals, it is difficult to assess 
his work performance or his reputation for reliability, trustworthiness, honesty, or good 
judgment.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”24   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
22
 Item 1, supra note 2. 
 
23
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
25
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
5 
                                      
 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”27 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”28 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
26
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition)”, is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” may 
raise security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 25(g) may apply where there is “any illegal drug use 
after being granted a security clearance.”  
 
Between September 2012 and at least September 2013, Applicant smoked 
marijuana cigarettes and marijuana-filled pipes approximately two times per month. He 
admitted using marijuana after he was granted a DOD security clearance. Depending 
on when Applicant described his marijuana abuse, such use was for a variety of general 
recreation and social reasons including, to relax while “hanging out” with friends, or in 
the presence of his spouse,” or to address a difficulty he had sleeping at night. His 
characterizations of recreational use are diametrically opposed: “I never used it 
recreationally” versus “the nature of the use was merely recreational. . . .”  The 
inconsistencies in Applicant’s characterizations lead me to believe the truth lies 
somewhere in between his explanations: the use was for a variety of general recreation 
and social reasons, as well as to address his sleep issues. Applicant admitted 
purchasing, possessing, and using marijuana despite having been granted a security 
clearance. Because of the inconsistencies in Applicant’s stated reasons for his 
marijuana abuse, it is difficult to determine the accuracy of his estimated frequency or 
duration of the marijuana use. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) have been established.  
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is “a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
7 
                                      
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation.” 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) minimally apply. Applicant’s marijuana abuse occurred 
from September 2012 to at least September 2013. He smoked marijuana cigarettes and 
pipes approximately two times per month. Because of his inconsistent statements 
regarding the reasons for such marijuana abuse, it is difficult to determine if there were 
unusual circumstances that facilitated such activity. Applicant has never received any 
medical treatment or counseling related to the substance abuse, and he has never been 
evaluated or diagnosed for substance abuse or dependence. Applicant now intends to 
refrain from such use in the future. The Government put its trust in Applicant when it 
granted him a secret security clearance in 2012, and he broke that trust when he 
involved himself in his repeated use of marijuana over at least a one-year period. 
Furthermore, while Applicant has repeatedly stated a current intention not to use any 
drugs in the future, he has never submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any future violation.  
Applicant’s purported abstinence is viewed favorably, and he should be 
encouraged to continue it. He claims he no longer associates with other substance 
abusers, and while that may be true, Applicant’s acknowledgment that he used 
marijuana in front of his wife, is cause for concern. Because Applicant has not furnished 
a reasonable basis for ignoring his fiduciary responsibilities of holding a security 
clearance, but instead resorted to marijuana use, claiming it was essentially because of 
his sleeping problems (as well as his self-disputed general recreation and social 
reasons), such use may recur. Furthermore, one of Applicant’s stated reasons for 
stopping his use of marijuana was “the opportunity to work on a federal contract 
requiring a security clearance.” Applicant already had that clearance. In the absence of 
positive character evidence, and because of the uncertainty established by his various 
versions of causation, there is continuing doubt as to Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
                                      
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my analysis below.      
 
There is some mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept. Applicant 
has never been evaluated or diagnosed for drug abuse or dependence. His marijuana 
abuse purportedly ceased in September 2013. Applicant’s abstinence is viewed 
favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue it. He supposedly no longer 
associates with other substance abusers. 
 
There is also more substantial evidence supporting the security concerns. 
Applicant used marijuana over one-year period while possessing a security clearance. 
He knew he was violating both federal law and his fiduciary responsibilities when he 
resorted to purchasing, possessing, and using marijuana, but it apparently did not 
matter for he did so on numerous occasions. There are several troubling aspects of this 
case, including Applicant’s various inconsistent versions of the reasons for his 
marijuana use; marijuana use remains a federal criminal violation; and his continued 
use of marijuana after being granted a security clearance. While Applicant now intends 
to refrain from such use in the future, based on his track record, it is difficult to give that 
vow much weight.  
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.29 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with some questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. (See AG && 
2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. 
Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
  
                                                          
29
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
