 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-03424 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). On October 23, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred her case to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether her clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2014, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated April 7, 2015, was provided to her by letter dated April 
20, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on May 1, 2015. She was afforded a period of 
30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not provide additional information within the allotted 30-day period after 
receipt of the FORM. On August 12, 2015, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. Her 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
since November 2013, and is a first-time applicant for a security clearance. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant was awarded a GED in December 2007. (Item 2, Item 3) Applicant was 
awarded a medical insurance billing and coding diploma in January 2010. (Item 2, Item 
3) She was awarded associate of applied science degrees in airframe and powerplant in 
June 2012 and July 2012, respectively. (Item 2, Item 3) Applicant married in October 
2010, and has a minor daughter from a previous relationship. (Item 2, Item 3) She did 
not serve in the armed forces. (Item 2) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR contains 22 separate debt allegations totaling $24,940. These 
debts are from a variety of creditors and range from a $137 collection account to a 
$7,242 charged-off repossession account. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.n) 
 
There is substantial evidence to support the SOR allegations through Applicant’s 
admissions and her credit report dated January 14, 2014. (Item 2, Item 3, Item 4) Her 
record of indebtedness began in 2007 and has been ongoing. (Item 3, Item 4) Applicant 
claims that she recently sought financial advice through a website service and began 
using “suggestions” to resolve her credit problems. (Item 3) Applicant stated during her 
February 17, 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM 
PSI) that she has been struggling financially ever since she became pregnant out of 
wedlock toward the end of 2007. (Item 3) She indicated during her February 2014 OPM 
PSI that she would be contacting various creditors and making payment arrangements. 
(Item 3) There is no evidence that Applicant followed through and arranged payment 
plans with her creditors or otherwise resolved her debts. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. The available information shows 
that Applicant has taken little or no affirmative action to resolve her delinquent debts. 
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts.2 Rather 
the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, 
the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that [she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that [she] has 
established a plan to resolve [her] financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of [her] 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.3 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances, 
articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. She failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past efforts to 
address her delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on a 
scant paragraph of explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
 
 After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,4 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
                                                          
1
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
2
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
3
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
4
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.v:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
