 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05848 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 15, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 4, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on June 8, 2015, and reassigned to me on June 23, 2015. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 2015, scheduling 
the hearing for July 23, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
 
2 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. She submitted documents that were marked AE E and F and admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 30, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is applying for 
eligibility to hold a public trust position. She attended college for a period, but she did 
not earn a degree. She is married with two children, ages five and one.1 
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment, underemployment, and being a stay-at-
home mother before she started her current job in March 2013. She had an expensive 
surgery and gave birth to two children. Her medical insurance did not cover all of the 
costs of the surgery and the childbirths. Her sister passed away in 2012, and Applicant 
took in her sister’s two teenage children. Applicant was unable to pay all her bills and a 
number of debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 22 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted owing all the debts 
with the exception of the $13,239 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Each debt is also 
listed on at least one credit report. Medical debts comprise 13 SOR allegations: the 
$13,239 medical debt and 12 additional debts with balances totaling about $8,670. 
There are nine miscellaneous delinquent debts with balances totaling about $3,400. 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the $13,239 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. She 
stated her medical insurance made a billing error but eventually paid the debt. It was 
removed from her credit report and does not appear on the two most recent credit 
reports in evidence. None of the 12 remaining medical debts identify who provided the 
medical services. Six of the medical debts and two other debts do not appear on the two 
most recent credit reports.3 
 
 Applicant paid five debts totaling $258 (SOR ¶¶ 1.r-1.v). Applicant also paid 
several accounts that were not listed in the SOR. She owed the IRS between $3,000 to 
$4,000 for back taxes from 2010 and 2011. She instituted a repayment plan with the 
IRS, which she has completed. She had about $10,000 in student loans that were in 
default. She brought the student loans out of default and is making regular monthly 
payments. Her current balance is about $6,000. Following the advice of a nationally 
recognized financial expert, her initial plan was to aggressively pay her student loans 
before attacking her other debts. She realized that plan might mean that her other debts 
would not be addressed for an extended period. Her current plan is to make her monthly 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-26, 55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-30, 45-46, 55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE A. 
 
 
3 
student loan payments while paying her smallest delinquent debt before moving on to 
the next smallest debt.4 
 
 Applicant’s niece and nephew are now adults and moved out of Applicant’s 
house. She credibly testified that her finances have improved, and that she will continue 
to pay the remaining debts. She has not received formal financial counseling, but she 
has a budget, she reads financial experts’ advice, and she listens to their broadcasts.5 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters and documents attesting to her excellent 
job performance, honesty, work ethic, leadership, professionalism, responsibility, 
dependability, honor, trustworthiness, dedication, and integrity.6 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 20-23, 32-35, 56-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE E, F. 
 
5 Tr. at 22, 29-38, 46-47, 60-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C. 
 
6 AE B, D. 
 
4 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment, underemployment, surgery, and sister’s death were 
events beyond her control. She paid the IRS her back taxes; she brought her student 
loans out of default and is making regular monthly payments; and she paid five of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. She successfully disputed the largest medical debt, and a 
number of the other debts no longer appear on her credit report. She has a budget and 
has been following the advice of a national recognized financial expert. She credibly 
testified that she will continue with her student loan payments and address her 
delinquent debts one at a time until they are all resolved. 
 
 A public trust position adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 I find that Applicant established a plan to resolve her financial problems, and she 
has taken significant action to implement that plan. She acted responsibly and made a 
good-faith effort to pay her debts. There are clear indications that her financial problems 
are being resolved. They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do 
not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely applicable because 
Applicant is still in the process of paying her debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not completely 
applicable because some of Applicant’s financial issues were within her control. AG ¶ 
20(e) is applicable to the successfully disputed medical debt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence, the factors that led to her 
financial problems, and the steps she has taken to remedy those problems. Her 
finances are not perfect, but I am convinced she will continue her efforts to remedy her 
financial issues. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
