 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02828 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F and Guideline.E. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On July 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a response dated September 15, 2014, Applicant denied each of the single 
allegations raised under each guideline. He also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was 
assigned the case on February 4, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 24, 
2015, setting the hearing for April 15, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered six documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6. It also stipulated that the actual debt cited in the sole allegation 
under Guideline F was no longer outstanding. (Transcript at 7) Applicant offered 
testimony and four documents, which were accepted without objection as Exs. A-D. The 
record was held open until May 1, 2015, in the event Applicant had additional 
documents to submit. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 24, 2015. Two 
additional documents were timely received by the government and forwarded to me. 
They were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. E-F on May 1, 2015. The 
record was then closed. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 76-year-old consultant who has worked for his present employer 
for over a year. He has earned a bachelor’s degree and completed some graduate 
study. During his career, he rose from an entry-level engineering position to the level of 
senior director. He has maintained a security clearance since 1962 without incident. 
Applicant is a widower who is active with multiple charitable causes. During his career, 
he has been given several honors for his work performance. 
 
 Since 1995, Applicant has had money withheld from his paychecks for his 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and home state income taxes, and paid estimated 
taxes. In 2006, he stopped filing his federal and state tax returns. (Tr. 20-22)  
Consequently, no tax return was submitted for tax year (TY) 2005. He did this because 
a businessman told him that as long as he was owed a refund, he did not have to a file 
tax return. (Tr. 21) He was then given the caveat: “’that only works for three years.’ And 
you don’t get any penalty for not filing.” Applicant never checked with the IRS regarding 
the accuracy of this information. (Tr. 23) Disliking the task of preparing tax returns, and 
knowing he had taxes paid or withheld, he thought, “that allows me to procrastinate.” 
(Tr. 21) He figured he could file for extensions and pay estimated taxes, then let the 
extensions pass without more action. (Tr. 24, 27) Therefore, he was surprised when he 
later received a letter from the IRS stating he owed “$250,000 or some such number” in 
taxes. (Tr. 21)  He did not file tax returns the following year, in 2007, or again in 2008 
and 2009. (Tr. 27) 
 
 In August 2011, a tax lien was imposed against Applicant for TY 2005 and TY 
2006. (Tr. 26, 29) This occurred about six months after he had received a letter from the 
IRS. That letter advised him that it had not received his tax returns for TY 2005 and TY 
2006, and that he owed the IRS $248,000. Already knowing he had not filed those 
returns, he had ignored the notification letter. News of a forthcoming tax lien, however, 
motivated him to contact the IRS and a tax preparation service he had seen advertised 
on television. (Tr. 32) He had little luck with the latter, so he focused on working with the 
IRS. An IRS agent helped Applicant put together what he needed to complete some of 
his previously unfiled tax returns. (Tr. 35) Applicant was advised that the tax advice a 
businessman had given to him was incorrect. Ultimately, the lien was released and he 
received refunds for TY 2008 and TY 2009. (Tr. 36) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 From 2011 through 2012, Applicant provided comfort and care for his terminally 
ill wife. He timely filed a federal tax return in 2011 for TY 2010. (Tr. 43-44) He testified 
that he filed for an extension to file TY 2011 federal taxes in 2012 because, after his 
wife passed away, there were many estate-related issues that needed to be addressed. 
To date, his 2012 and 2013 federal tax returns are unresolved, but he testified that he is 
is working with an IRS agent toward their completion. (Tr. 39)  
 
Applicant relies on the IRS agent because he is reluctant to go to an accountant. 
(Tr. 40) Applicant maintains that the IRS gave him three years to file his tax returns for 
TY 2012 and TY 2013. Applicant is poised to satisfy the requirements for these tax 
years in the near future. (Tr. 40-41) He provided no evidence indicating he had three 
years to file these tax returns. There is no documentary evidence that his TY 2012 and 
TY 2013 tax filings are currently subject to any filing extensions. 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in January 2014. In 
response to a question asking whether he had failed to file or pay federal, state, or other 
taxes in the past seven years, he answered “no.” (Tr. 47-47; Ex. 1) He did so because 
he thought he had remediated such problems through his work with the IRS. He also 
answered “no” to a question asking whether he had a lien placed against him in the 
preceding seven years. (Tr. 48; Ex. 1) He testified that, at the time, he did not yet know 
about a 2013 state tax lien, and thought his earlier IRS tax lien was not at issue 
because it had been addressed and released, albeit belatedly. (Tr. 49-50) 
 
 In March 2014, Applicant learned from investigators that a state tax lien for 
$65,000 from the mid-2000s had been imposed in 2013. He was surprised, as he had 
recently been approved for a car loan. He had been aware, however, of a 2013 adverse 
state judgment against him for $65,000. He had failed to equate the judgment as being 
the same as a lien. He satisfied that state lien on April 24, 2014, with a lower payoff 
amount, which was applied toward his debt on May 29, 2014. (Tr. 59-60) The 
appropriate state tax return was filed at that time. (Tr. 60) 
 
Applicant is unsure why he did not disclose on his SCA to having had adverse 
judgments in the preceding seven years. (Tr. 54) He had some difficulty with some of 
the financial and legal terminology at issue. (Tr. 54-55) He testified he has since learned 
the applicable terminology. (Tr. 55-56) He has received some help from a financial 
advisor, although he has not received financial counseling. (Tr. 56) Applicant admits he 
procrastinated with regard to his tax issues. (Tr. 76-77) 
 
Multiple favorable references provide a positive image of Applicant, 
professionally and personally. He is known as generous, intelligent, and reliable. He is 
equally generous with making charitable contributions to both religious and medical 
causes. He is active within his church. 
 
At the end of the hearing, Applicant was asked to provide evidence supporting 
his assertion that an individual has three years to file federal tax returns and that no 
penalties were imposed if one’s taxes were overpaid. He wrote that he based his 
 
 
 
 
4 
position on discussions he had with peers, the fact that the IRS did not send him notices 
of belated filings until after three years had passed, and because he was not penalized 
for years when he had overpaid or over-withheld taxes. (Ex. E) 
 
The government urged that 26 U.S. Code 7203 is controlling with regard to a 
citizen’s annual tax filing obligations. It noted, “about the Guideline F part [of the case] . 
. . it doesn’t seem from the government’s standpoint that there is a legitimate basis for 
[Applicant’s] belief that he doesn’t have to file.” (Tr. 72) It urged that “it may be true that 
he may not be financially penalized if there is a refund. But he still has to file [a return] . . 
. . There is a legal obligation to file, even if you have a refund or . . . a zero balance 
owing to the taxes “ (Tr. 72-73) It further stressed that Applicant’s delay in addressing 
his state tax lien lasted for nine years. (Tr. 73) 
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
 
 
 
5 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence purporting to show Applicant 
is indebted to his state for a tax lien entered against him in 2013 for approximately 
$65,000. It asserted that the state tax lien remained unpaid. This is sufficient to invoke 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
           The SOR allegation focuses solely on this state tax lien. It does not reference any 
other aspect of Applicant’s finances, taxes, or his handling of those matters. The 
government stipulated that the lien at issue has been released, and the evidence 
supports that conclusion. Consequently, this particular situation is under control and that 
lien-based debt has been resolved. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c)-(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, where the 
significance of conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations is defined ([p]ersonal conduct can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information). Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process.  
 
The SOR allegation under this guideline focuses on Applicant’s SCA answers 
regarding liens and judgments. On his SCA, Applicant answered “no” to questions 
asking whether, in the preceding seven years, he 1) had failed to file any taxes when 
required by law and 2) had a lien placed against him for failing to pay taxes and other 
debts. It is alleged that these denials were intentionally untrue. 
 
Under this guideline, the following disqualifying conditions are available: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;   
  
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative;   
  
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 16(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information . . . ; and   
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
Applicant’s explanation for answering “no” to the questions at issue stretches 
credulity. By the time he completed his SCA in 2014, Applicant had faced multiple 
problems related to how he had been handling his taxes for nearly a decade. The 
questions at issue asked about liens and judgments in the preceding seven years. By 
then, he should have understood those terms enough to realize at least one of the 
questions merited an answer of “yes.” Moreover, the questions are worded simply and 
directly. Nothing in the questions suggests some liens or judgments should be excluded 
from disclosure because of any criterion except their age, i.e., the intervening 
satisfaction of a lien, judgment, or debt; the granting of an extension; etc. Again, sound 
judgment should have led him to answer at least one, if not both, of these questions in 
the affirmative. Such action would have given investigators sufficient notice regarding 
these issues, and shown Applicant to be a reliably forthcoming and trustworthy source.   
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable:   
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts;   
 
AG ¶ 17(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
  
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
   
 
 
 
 
8 
AG ¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur;    
 
AG ¶ 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and   
 
AG ¶ 17(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability.   
 
Applicant’s conduct is recent and significant. In failing to give notice of some of 
the issues he had been having regarding his taxes, liens, and judgments, he seriously 
undermined the security clearance adjudication process. I find that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply to his SCA omissions.    
 
Whole-Person Concept  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.     
    
My comments under Guidelines F and E are incorporated in this whole-person 
analysis, as are the facts noted above related to Applicant and his life. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.   
 
Applicant is a mature and educated man. He has maintained a security clearance 
without incident for decades. As a threshold matter, I note that the debt at issue has 
been satisfied and related Guideline F security concerns mitigated. 
 
Issues regarding personal conduct remain unmitigated. Applicant’s explanation 
as to why he answered “no” to questions concerning past tax return filings and liens is 
convoluted and hard to believe. This is especially true for someone who has maintained 
a security clearance for so many years. His omissions were either intentional or 
Applicant lacks a basic understanding of the issues involved herein. Regardless, these 
omissions raise serious security concerns that have not been mitigated. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to his present eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. Applicant mitigated the security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline, but failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the security concerns under personal conduct guideline. 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
