 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-03025 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 25, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant timely answered the SOR on August 23, 2014, and requested that her 
case be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on March 13, 2015. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on April 
22, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on April 27, 2015. She had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. On July 30, 
2015, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned to me on July 
31, 2015. 
    
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the SOR allegations. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance.  Applicant has been employed with the company 
since March 2013.  She also has a part-time job. She has a high school diploma, and 
some college. She separated from her husband in September 2009. The divorce is 
pending. She has a 16-year-old son.  (Item 2)   
 
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing 
(e-QIP) on September 26, 2013. (Item 2) A subsequent background investigation 
revealed that Applicant had 18 delinquent debts, a total approximate balance of 
$22,354. (Item 3; Item 4)   
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant indicates that most of the unpaid debts are  
involved in divorce litigation proceedings. She references a letter from her attorney that 
was to be submitted at a later date.  A letter from her attorney was not submitted. 
Applicant is in the process of rehabilitating the student loan accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a – 1.e and 1.o. After ten months of payments, the student loan accounts will no 
longer be in default.  The student loan accounts are the subject of litigation in her 
divorce. She states the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.k – 1.r are either paid in full or 
she is making payment arrangements. She did not provide documentation to verify this 
assertion. (Item 2)  
 
Status of the Delinquent Debts: 
  
SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e and 1.o: delinquent student loan accounts in the amount of 
$5,343; $3,225; $2,866; $2,576, $1,801; and $512. (Item 3 at 3; Item 4 at 2) Applicant 
did not submit matters in response to the FORM. Department Counsel obtained an 
updated credit report on March 10, 2015, which indicated that Applicant has brought all 
of her student loan accounts current. (Item 5 at 2-7) This indicates Applicant 
successfully rehabilitated her delinquent student loans.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: $1,200 medical account placed for collection in August 2012. (Item 3 
at 8; Item 4 at 2) Applicant states that she has a payment arrangement for this account. 
She did not provide the specifics of the payment arrangement. She also mentions that 
this is a subject of her divorce litigation. The most recent credit report dated March 10, 
2015, lists this debt as delinquent with a $1,200 balance. (Item 2 at 1; Item 5 at 2) 
Considering the account balance remains at the original $1,200 balance, it is unlikely 
that payments were being made on this account.  
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $686 delinquent cell phone account placed for collection in February 
2010. (Item 3 at 9; Item 4 at 2) Applicant claims that this is for a cell phone that her ex-
husband used even though the account was in her name. She states the account is a 
subject of her divorce litigation. The March 2015 credit report lists the debt as unpaid 
and the balance remains at $686. (Item 2 at 1; Item 5 at 1)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: $430 delinquent water bill placed for collection in May 2009. (Item 3 
at 9; Item 4 at 2) Applicant mentions that this account was for water service for her 
marital residence. The bill was in her name. When she moved out, her husband was to 
transfer the bill to his name. He did not transfer the account and did not pay the bill. This 
account is a subject of her divorce litigation. (Item 2 at 1) The March 2015 credit report 
lists the debt as unpaid and the balance remains at $430. (Item 5 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: credit card account with a balance of $371, past due in the amount of 
$53. (Item 4 at 2). Applicant indicated this account was current, but provided no 
documentation verifying this assertion. (Item 2 at 2) The March 2015 credit report lists 
the account as being past due in the amount of $430. (Item 5 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.l: convenience store debt for insufficient funds checks written in 
July 2008 in the amounts of $282 and $145. (Item 4 at 2; Item 5 at 2) Applicant claims 
her ex-husband forged the checks in her name. The debts are the subject of her divorce 
litigation. (Item 2 at 2) The March 2015 credit report lists both accounts as remaining 
past due. (Item 5 at 2)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: $228 medical account placed for collection in May 2010. (Item 3 at 
10; Item 4 at 2) Applicant claims the debt is paid in full. She provided no documentation, 
such as receipts, verifying the debt is paid. (Item 2 at 2) The March 2015 credit report 
still lists the debt, but states “Consumer disputes this account information.” (Item 5 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m: $99 medical account placed for collection. (Item 4 at 2). Applicant 
claims this debt is currently paid in full. She did not provide documentation verifying that 
the debt was paid. (Item 2 at 2) The debt is not listed on the March 2015 credit report. 
(Item 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.n: $29 student loan account placed for collection in April 2012. (Item 3 
at 4; Item 4 at 2). Applicant claims this debt is currently paid in full. She did not provide 
documentation verifying that the debt was paid. (Item 2 at 2) The March 2015 credit 
report lists the debt as delinquent. (Item 5 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.p: $1,803 delinquent debt placed for collection in May 2011. (Item 3 at 
8) Applicant claims that payment arrangements were set up for this account. She also 
mentioned that this debt is a subject in her divorce litigation. She did not provide 
documentation of the payment arrangements and proof that payments were being made 
on the account. The debt is not listed on the March 2015 credit report. (Item 2 at 2; Item 
5)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.q: $436 medical account placed for collection in January 2013. (Item 3 
at 9). Applicant claims this debt is currently paid in full. She did not provide 
documentation verifying that the debt was paid. (Item 2 at 2) The debt is not listed on 
the March 2015 credit report. (Item 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.r: $322 medical account placed for collection in March 2013. (Item 3 at 
9). Applicant claims this debt is currently paid in full. She did not provide documentation 
verifying that the debt was paid. (Item 2 at 2) The debt is not listed on the March 2015 
credit report. (Item 5)  
 
Applicant provided no information about her current financial situation, including   
her monthly income and her monthly debts. She did not provide information on her duty 
performance such as performance evaluations, letters from supervisors and co-workers. 
Although Applicant mentioned in her answer to the SOR that her attorney was going to 
submit a separate letter, DOHA did not receive a letter from Applicant’s attorney.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that she has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past several years.    
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Although Applicant indicates that she either paid or entered into payment plans to 
resolve several of her debts, she provided no documentation to support her assertions, 
such as receipts, cancelled checks, or a formal payment agreement from a creditor. She 
claims several of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.h, 1.j, 1.l, and 1.p) are involved in her 
 
6 
 
 
divorce litigation.  Although she mentioned her attorney was going to forward a separate 
statement, no statement was entered into the record.  Applicant’s failure to provide 
sufficient evidence to demonstrate that she is resolving her delinquent accounts still 
raises doubts about her reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.   
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because Applicant 
separated from her husband in 2009.  Applicant’s divorce remains pending litigation six 
years later. Applicant encountered circumstances beyond her control which caused 
some financial problems. However, I cannot conclude that she acted responsibly under 
the circumstances because she provided no proof she is in the process of resolving her 
delinquent debts.   
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. While 
Applicant has rehabilitated her student loans, several delinquent debts remain 
unresolved. Applicant’s financial situation is not under control.   
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.e, and 1.o because proof was provided that her student loans were rehabilitated. SOR 
¶¶ 1.m, 1.q, and 1.r are also found for Applicant because Applicant states she paid the 
debts, and the debts were not listed on the most recent credit report in the record, dated 
March 10, 2015. While Applicant claims that she either resolved or was in payment 
plans for her remaining debts, she did not provide documentation verifying this assertion 
such as receipts, copies of formal payment agreements with the company, and 
cancelled checks. Applicant failed to demonstrate that she is making a good-faith effort 
to resolve the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.1, 1.n, and 1.p. 
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f because the March 2015 
credit report indicates Applicant formally disputes this debt. However, there is no 
information regarding the outcome of the dispute.  
 
While Applicant claims she has either paid or is resolving her remaining 
delinquent accounts, she has not provided documentation of the actions that she claims 
she has taken to resolve her accounts. She maintains that several accounts alleged in 
the SOR are involved in pending divorce litigation, but nothing in the record 
corroborates this assertion.  Applicant also did not provide details regarding the status 
of the divorce litigation. Applicant chose to have a decision based on the administrative 
record, as a result, there was no opportunity to discuss these matters in further detail. 
 
7 
 
 
Based on the evidence in the case file, Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the concerns raised under financial considerations.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s separation 
and pending divorce partially contributed to Applicant’s financial problems.  However, 
Applicant has been separated from her husband for over six years. She continued to 
incur delinquent accounts several years after her separation from her husband.      
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations which raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. In other words, if they have trouble managing their finances, this can raise 
doubts about their ability to handle and protect classified information. Applicant’s history 
of financial problems raises doubts about her ability to handle and protect classified 
information. Mindful of my duty to resolve cases where there is doubt in favor of national 
security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e, 1.m, 1.o, 1.q, 1.r:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.l, and 1.n:   Against  Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                        
 
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
