 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04658 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from circumstances that were partially 
beyond his control. Although he has limited financial resources, Applicant resolved four 
of the SOR debts. He started the process to correct his financial situation, and 
understands what is required of him to establish his financial responsibility. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. His falsification of his 2014 security 
clearance application (SCA) continues to raise serious concerns about his honesty, 
judgment, and on his ability to follow rules and regulations. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on March 22, 2014. The Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct) on October 
20, 2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 16, 2015, and requested a hearing 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). The case was assigned to me on April 28, 2015. DOHA issued the notice of 
hearing on April 29, 2015, scheduling a hearing for May 20, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant 
testified and presented five exhibits (AE 1 through 5). All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 28, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer, Applicant admitted all the SOR ¶ 1 factual allegations, with 
explanations. Concerning SOR ¶ 2.a, he admitted that he omitted the required 
information, but denied that his omission was made with the intent to mislead the 
Government or to falsify his SCA. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while 
testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old physical security officer working for a federal 
contractor. He requires a security clearance to retain his job. Applicant married his wife 
in 2012, and they have five children, ages seven, six, five, two, and four months. He 
graduated from high school in 2006, and has completed some college courses. He is 
currently enrolled in college and working toward an associate’s degree.  
 
Applicant was employed part time for retailers from 2002 to 2009. He has worked 
full time as a security officer for different companies from 2009 to present. He was hired 
for a part-time position by his current employer in November 2013. His employment was 
contingent on his eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant was suspended from his 
position in April 2015, pending the adjudication of his clearance. 
 
Applicant submitted his first SCA in March 2014. Section 26 (Financial Record) of 
the 2014 SCA asked Applicant whether in the last seven years he had any property 
repossessed, debts turned over to collection agencies, credit cards suspended or 
charged off, or whether he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. 
Applicant answered “no” to all the financial questions and disclosed no repossessions, 
or delinquent or in collection debts.  
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the nine 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, which are established by his April 2014 credit 
report and Applicant’s admissions. (GE 3) On April 2014, Applicant was interviewed by 
a government investigator and questioned about his delinquent accounts. He told the 
investigator that he did not list any of his delinquent debts because he was not familiar 
with his debts at the time he submitted his 2014 SCA. At his hearing, Applicant 
explained that he did not know what was being reported in his credit report, and that he 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
knew he had existing delinquent debts, but he did not know the total owed for the debts. 
He explained that this was his first SCA, and he did not want to report inaccurate 
information. Applicant claimed that he was not provided any guidance or assistance 
completing his SCA. 
 
In 2012, Applicant contracted for the services of a financial management 
company to help him resolve his delinquent debts. He paid a $100 initiation fee, and 
arranged a payment plan of $39 a month. He participated in the payment plan for two 
months and terminated his participation because he could not afford it. In April 2014, he 
returned to the same company for a free credit counseling evaluation. During his April 
2014 interview, Applicant acknowledged all the SOR delinquent debts were his debts, 
indicated they were unresolved, and stated his intention to pay them.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $9,061 delinquent debt for a car Applicant purchased in 
2009. Shortly after the purchase, he was involved in an accident. He had no insurance 
to cover the repairs, and surrendered the car to the dealership. At his hearing, Applicant 
testified that he had established a payment plan and paid off the debt in February 2015.  
 
Applicant submitted a statement of payments showing payments made to a car 
dealership from February 2012 to February 2015, for a car purchased in February 2012. 
(AE 3) It is not clear from the document submitted whether the payments were made to 
pay for the car he purchased and wrecked in 2009. The creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a 
(for the 2009 car) is not the same creditor to whom Applicant made payments from 2012 
to 2015. When he was interviewed in April 2014, Applicant stated that the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a was unpaid. He did not tell the investigator that he had established a 
payment plan and was making payments. Additionally, the statement of payments 
indicates that the payments were for a car purchased in 2012. The car repossessed 
was purchased and wrecked in 2009.  
 
The remaining alleged SOR debts pertain to unpaid medical bills and delinquent 
consumer accounts. Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing that he 
successfully disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (AE 3) He settled the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h for $278 (the original debt was for $1,530). He testified that he 
made an electronic payment for $100, and then issued a $178 check in March 2015, to 
pay off the debt. He also paid the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i in May 2015. (AE 
3) 
 
Concerning the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.f, these are unpaid 
medical debts that Applicant incurred between 2008 and 2010. Applicant explained that 
at the time he incurred these medical services, he did not have medical insurance or the 
financial resources to pay them. He attempted to resolve the debts in 2012, when he 
retained the services of a financial management company. He testified that he is 
currently consulting with a credit counselor who is helping him to resolve his debts. His 
most recent contact with the creditors was the week before his hearing. Applicant 
intends to pay his debts sometime in the near future. However, in April 2015, he was 
suspended from his job pending the resolution of his clearance eligibility.  
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant’s wife is currently working part time. Their combined 2014 income was 
around $56,000. He described 2014 as the best earnings year they ever had. Before he 
started working for his current employer, his income was substantially less. Applicant 
lives from paycheck to paycheck because he has a large family and limited financial 
resources.  
 
In September 2010, Applicant was involved in an argument with his wife (then 
girlfriend). The police responded to a complaint filed by one of his wife’s relatives, and 
Applicant was arrested (placed in handcuffs, booked, and kept in pre-trial confinement 
for two days), and charged with battery and domestic violence. In November 2010, he 
was acquitted of the charges. 
 
Section 26 (Police Record) of the 2014 SCA asked Applicant whether in the last 
seven years he had been arrested by any police officer. Applicant answered “no” and 
failed to disclose his September 2010 arrest. Applicant testified that he made an honest 
mistake because he was rushing to complete his SCA. He claimed that he had verbally 
informed his employer during his employment interview about the arrest, the charges, 
and that he was acquitted of the offenses. He also averred that he was honest and 
forthright during his interview with a government agent in April 2014. The investigator 
acknowledged in the summary of the interview that Applicant “was forthright with the 
arrest information in response to routine questions.” Applicant noted that he is in the 
process of requesting the expungement of the record. 
 
Applicant testified that his father was in the military, and when he was a child, 
Applicant lived in the same military reservation where he now works. He believes that 
his current position is more than just a job. He considers his job as a great opportunity 
for him and his family. With the additional anticipated income from his job with the 
federal contractor, Applicant believes he will be able to pay his debts and better provide 
for his family. He averred that he tried to maintain contact with his creditor and pay his 
debts, but he did not have the financial means to pay both his family’s living expenses 
and his debts.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial situation and for his omissions in 
his SCA. He believes that with his anticipated income and his wife’s income, they will be 
able to regain control of their financial situation. He understands that he is required to 
maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance. He and his wife 
follow a budget, but they have to juggle their debt payments to meet their more present 
obligations. 
 
Applicant presented numerous positive reference letters from supervisors and 
coworkers. Taken together they present an impressive mosaic of his performance and 
work ethic. Applicant is considered to be a hardworking and dedicated employee who 
displays a consistent positive attitude. He is also considered to be a trustworthy and a 
reliable employee.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Between 2007 and 2010, Applicant accumulated the nine debts alleged in the 
SOR totaling close to $14,000. He resolved four debts, and six remain outstanding. 
Financial considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of his inability to pay the debts, and not 
because of his unwillingness to do so. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not fully apply because Applicant’s financial problems are 
recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable because his financial problems 
were caused, in part, by his underemployment, and him being the primary provider for 
his large family. Applicant maintained some communication with his creditors, and in 
2012, he sought the assistance of a financial management company to help him resolve 
his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) are partially applicable. He received financial counseling 
through the financial management company, and he resolved four of the debts alleged 
in the SOR. 
 
Applicant is in a difficult financial situation. He is living from paycheck to 
paycheck, and his and his wife’s income are barely sufficient for him to establish a 
viable payment plan to pay his debt. Notwithstanding, he resolved four SOR debts, and 
he intends to continue paying the remaining debts. Applicant’s credit report shows that 
he is living within his means, and there is no evidence of any additional delinquent debts 
in addition to the SOR debts.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2014 SCA when he 
failed to disclose his 2010 arrest and charges. I find his omission was deliberate and 
with the intent to conceal the information or to mislead the Government. Applicant was 
fully aware that he was arrested, charged, and tried for criminal offenses in 2010. He 
was 26 when he submitted his 2014 SCA, and had been working as a security guard 
during the last five years. In light of his work experience, he should have been more 
honest about his past criminal record.  
 
  Considering Applicant’s testimony in light of the whole evidence, and having 
observed Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, his explanations for his failure to 
disclose his 2010 arrest and charges, and for his failure to disclose his financial 
problems are not credible.  
 
  Applicant’s falsification of his 2014 SCA trigger the applicability the following 
disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 None of the above mitigating conditions fully apply. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply 
because Applicant did not make a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the falsification. It 
was not until he was interviewed by a government investigator that he acknowledged 
his 2010 arrest and charges (and that he had financial problems).  
 
AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply because his falsification of the 2014 SCA is a recent 
and serious. The SCA questions are clear and he understood what he was required to 
disclose. His explanation for his failure to disclose his arrest and charges is not credible. 
Applicant falsified his SCA because he was concerned about the possible adverse 
effect the information would have on his ability to hold a clearance. The remaining 
mitigating conditions are not sufficiently raised by the facts and circumstances of this 
case and are not applicable. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is married and has five children. His financial problems resulted from 
difficult circumstances that were partially beyond his control. Although he has limited 
financial resources, Applicant resolved four of the SOR debts. I believe he has started 
the process to correct his financial situation. He understands what is required of him to 
establish his financial responsibility. Given additional time, I believe that he will regain 
full control of his financial situation. Financial considerations concern are mitigated.  
 
Nevertheless, Applicant’s falsification of his 2014 SCA continues to raise serious 
concerns about his honesty, judgment, and his ability to follow rules and regulations. He 
failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
