 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06816 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On April 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (effective within the DOD on September 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((e-QIP), dated June 3, 2014).  
 
2 
                                      
 
1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and 
E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators could not make 
an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 29, 2014. In a sworn 
statement, dated May 19, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On June 16, 2015, Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to 
me on July 9, 2015. A Notice of Hearing was issued on July 31, 2015. I convened the 
hearing, as scheduled, on August 25, 2015. 
 
 During the hearing, two Government exhibits (GE 1 and GE 3), four Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE D), and one administrative exhibit were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was 
received on September 2, 2015. The record closed on September 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under financial considerations (¶ 1.a.) and personal conduct (¶ 2.a.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a naval architect since November 2007.2 He previously served in similar 
positions with other companies beginning in April 2003.3 A May 1976 high school 
graduate,4 Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in naval architecture and marine 
engineering in May 1981 and took a semester of additional credits in early 2004, but did 
not earn another degree.5 Applicant has never served with the United States military.6 
He was granted a confidential security clearance in 1986 and a secret security 
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 11-12; Tr. at 27. 
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at  13-16. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11; Tr. at 25-26, 51-52. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16; Tr. at 26. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
clearance in 2003.7 He was married the first time in May 1985 and divorced in October 
1991. He married again in February 2007.8 He has a son, born in 1987.9 
 
Financial Considerations 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances except that he did not file 
his federal or state income tax returns for the tax years 2011, 2012, and 2013, as 
required by law.10 With one exception when he was overseas and had a professional 
prepare his tax returns, Applicant generally prepared and filed his own federal and state 
income tax returns using a computer program or by hand.11 He attributed his failures to 
file his returns for those tax years to evolving reasons: in his June 2014 e-QIP, he said 
he needed to get his tax returns from the previous year;12 during his June 2014 
interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), he 
said it was solely procrastination, and that there were no events beyond his control that 
prohibited him from filing the tax returns as required;13 in his Answer to SOR in May 
2015, it was because he was concerned that he was missing some necessary, but 
unspecified, information that should be included in his returns, and that he suffered a 
computer failure that extended his delays in filing the returns;14 and during his August 
2015 hearing, Applicant said there was a combination of procrastination in failing to find 
some of his wife’s certificates of deposit (CDs) or an individual retirement account (IRA), 
a printer breakdown, juggling work requirements, his wife’s health issues, and general 
                                                          
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 40. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19-21; Tr. at 26. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 22-23; Tr. at 26. 
 
10
 The legal requirement to file a federal income tax return is based upon certain conditions, including an individual’s 
gross income and other enumerated conditions. Once it is determined that there is an obligation to so file, the 
following applies: 
 
Any person required under this title to pay any estimated tax or tax, or required by this title or by 
regulations made under authority thereof to make a return, keep any records, or supply any 
information, who willfully fails to pay such estimated tax or tax, make such return, keep such 
records, or supply such information, at the time or times required by law or regulations, shall, in 
addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction 
thereof, shall be fined not more than $25,000 ($100,000 in the case of a corporation), or imprisoned 
not more than 1 year, or both, together with the costs of prosecution. In the case of any person with 
respect to whom there is a failure to pay any estimated tax, this section shall not apply to such 
person with respect to such failure if there is no addition to tax under section 6654 or 6655 with 
respect to such failure. In the case of a willful violation of any provision of section 6050I, the first 
sentence of this section shall be applied by substituting "felony" for "misdemeanor" and "5 years" 
for "1 year".  
26 U.S.C. § 7203, Willful failure to file return, supply information, or pay tax 
11
 Tr. at 34. 
 
12
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 41-42. 
 
13
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 25, 2014), at 5. 
 
14
 Applicant’s Answer to SOR, dated May 19, 2015, at 1. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
life complications.15 Applicant also repeatedly referred to the fact that since he expected 
to receive refunds each year, he was not concerned about filing late. He failed to see 
the urgency and was not motivated to do so, because by failing to file his income taxes 
on time, the government was benefiting from interest-free loans.16  
During his OPM interview, Applicant stated an intention to file his delinquent 
income tax returns, beginning with the oldest first, and have all of the returns completed 
by the 2014 tax filing date, essentially April 15, 2015.17 They were not. Applicant filed 
his federal and state income tax returns for 2014 on April 15, 2015,18 and he prepared 
his delinquent federal income tax returns, but as of the date of the hearing, those 
returns – all Forms 1040A19 – had not been sent to the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS).20 Applicant acknowledged that while he had filed his state income tax return for 
2011, he had still not filed his state income tax returns for the tax years 2012 and 
2013.21 There is no evidence that Applicant has received counseling related to the filing 
of his income tax returns. 
 Applicant’s adjusted gross income in 2011 was $83,446.03;22 in 2012, it was 
$84,352.59;23 in 2013, it was $89,129.13;24 and in 2014, it was $91,664.67.25 Based on 
the anticipated filings, it appears that Applicant should receive refunds for each such 
year, minus interest and penalties for delinquent filings, of between $6,500 and 
$6,900.26  
 
  
                                                          
15
 Tr. at 36-37, 40-41. Applicant noted that his wife is a homemaker, without a salary, but that she had some 
CDs and an IRA. He characterized them as “relatively minor stuff,” that related to annual interest fluctuations. Tr. at 
53-54. 
 
16
 Tr. at 36-38. 
 
17
 GE 2, supra note 13, at 5. 
 
18
 AE D (Form 1040A (U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 2014), dated April 15, 2015); Tr. at 49. 
 
19
 AE A (Form 1040A (U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 2011), dated August 18, 2015); AE B (Form 1040A 
(U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 2012), dated August 19, 2015); AE C (Form 1040A (U.S. Individual Income Tax 
Return 2013), undated and unsigned).  
 
20
 Tr. at 40. 
 
21
 Tr. at 48-49. 
 
22
 AE A, supra note 19, at 1. 
 
23
 AE B, supra note 19, at 1. 
 
24
 AE C, supra note 19, at 1.  
 
25
 AE D, supra note 19, at 1.  
 
26
 AE A, supra note 19, at 2; AE B, supra note 19, at 2; AE C, supra note 19, at 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.a.): As noted above, Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state 
income tax returns for 2011, 2012, and 2013. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
                                                          
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
                                                          
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline notes a specific condition that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(g), a “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required. . .” may raise security concerns. Applicant failed to timely file his federal and 
state income tax returns for 2011, 2012, and 2013. As of the date of the hearing, only 
his state income tax return for 2011 had been filed, but the remaining returns still had 
not been filed. AG ¶ 19(g) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial considerations. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
Also, under AG ¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) do not apply. Applicant’s failures to timely file his 
state and federal income tax returns were neither infrequent nor under unusual 
circumstances; they constituted a routine practice that continued to occur over a 
multiyear period. As noted above, Applicant generally prepared and filed his own federal 
and state income tax returns using a computer program or by hand. He attributed his 
failures to file his returns for those tax years to evolving reasons: he needed to get his 
tax returns from the previous year; it was solely procrastination, and that there were no 
events beyond his control that prohibited him from filing the tax returns as required; it 
was because he was concerned that he was missing some necessary, but unspecified, 
information that should be included in his returns, and that he suffered a computer 
failure that extended his delays in filing the returns; there was a combination of 
procrastination in failing to find some of his wife’s CDs or an IRA, a printer breakdown, 
juggling work requirements, his wife’s health issues, general life complications; and 
since he expected to receive refunds each year, he was not concerned about filing late, 
he failed to see the urgency, and he was not motivated, for by failing to file his income 
taxes on time, the government was benefiting from interest-free loans. None of those 
enumerated reasons appears to qualify as something largely beyond Applicant’s 
control. It is his failure to see the urgency or to be motivated to do so, that sets 
Applicant’s actions apart. The law is to be complied with, and it is not up to the 
individual to determine the urgency, or generate the motivation, to comply with the law 
in a timely manner. In the absence of clear demonstrations that his behavior has been 
modified, there is nothing to indicate that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s actions under 
the circumstances presented continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.33 
 
                                                          
33
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(d), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. . . .  
 
Under AG ¶ 16(e), it is also potentially disqualifying if there is 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for 2011, 
2012, and 2013. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 17(e) may 
apply if “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
  
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(e) do not apply. As noted above, Applicant’s failures to 
timely file his state and federal income tax returns were neither infrequent nor under 
unusual circumstances; they constituted a routine practice that continued to occur over 
a multiyear period. Applicant simply failed to determine the urgency, or generate the 
motivation, to comply with the law in a timely manner. His actions reflect a somewhat 
 
9 
                                      
 
cavalier attitude towards his legal responsibilities for timely filing income tax returns, as 
well as his questionable judgment, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with 
established rules and regulations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s behavior. He has been 
serving as a naval architect with his current employer since November 2007, and he has 
previously served in similar positions with other companies since April 2003. There is no 
evidence of substance abuse, security violations, or indebtedness caused by frivolous or 
irresponsible spending. There is also no evidence of a history of not meeting financial 
obligations. Applicant has no delinquent debts. While he failed to timely file his federal 
and state income tax returns for certain years, for those years, it was anticipated that he 
would receive refunds for over-withheld income tax. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial 
than the mitigating evidence. Applicant routinely failed to timely file his federal and state 
income tax returns over a multi-year period. Although Applicant was aware of his 
failures, and the government’s interest in them, he failed to make timely efforts to 
address his taxes after being interviewed by OPM. He promised to have his income tax 
returns filed by April 15, 2015, but they were not. He received the SOR on April 29, 
2015, and the hearing was scheduled for August 25, 2015. Yet, despite the repeated 
warnings of the significance of his issue, Applicant failed to determine the urgency, or 
generate the motivation, to comply with the law. The state of the evidence is that 
Applicant finally prepared his federal income tax returns, but as of the hearing, he still 
had not filed them. He claimed he had filed one of his state income tax returns, but 
failed to submit documentation to confirm his claim. The other state income tax returns 
had not yet been prepared.  
 
10 
                                      
 
Applicant has demonstrated a very poor track record of timely filing federal and 
state income tax returns. His explanations for those failures are simply not credible. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
