1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04415
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerny, Esquire
September 3, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On October 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On November 13, 2014, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was first assigned
to another AJ on February 18, 2015, but it was then reassigned to this AJ on February
24, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 19, 2014, and the hearing was
convened as scheduled on March 12, 2015. 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits
A through C, which were also admitted without objection. The record was kept open
2
until March 27, 2015, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. The documents
that were timely received have been identified and entered into evidence without
objection as Exhibits D through K. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on
March 24, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of
Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 52 years old.  She is not married, and she has no children. Applicant
received a Bachelor of Science degree in Nursing in 1985, and a Masters degree in
Nursing in 2013. She is employed as a Registered Nurse for one company and as a
Medical Data Extraction by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations (1.a. through 1.j.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically bankruptcy and overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. At the
hearing, based on information learned during questioning of Applicant, Department
Counsel moved to amend the SOR and add one additional allegation, 1.k., which was
granted and will be reviewed below. All of the SOR allegations will be discussed below
in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 1998,
and that the bankruptcy discharged her debts in 1998. Applicant admitted this SOR
allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote that the filing “was a result of catastrophic
medical bills and no health insurance.”
Applicant testified that she filed her 1998 bankruptcy because she had been in a
serious automobile accident, and since she was a student and did not have health
insurance she was unable to pay for her medical bills. While she felt terrible filing
bankruptcy, the bills were just too large and she could not afford to pay them. The
bankruptcy did discharge all of her debts. Applicant could not recall the amount of debt
that was discharged in her 1998 bankruptcy. (Tr at 28-30.) Post-hearing Exhibit D gave
some information about this bankruptcy, but no information was given about the amount
of debt that was discharged. 
1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 2013,
but this bankruptcy was dismissed in 2013. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in
her RSOR, and she wrote she filed the bankruptcy after being unemployed for
approximately three years with no job prospects in sight and no savings available to her.
Applicant also wrote that because of her extremely negative feelings after filing her
3
previous bankruptcy in 1998, she decided to dismiss this bankruptcy and attempt to pay
off her creditors.  
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she became unemployed in 2010, and she
was unemployed or underemployed until the end of 2012. For the first two years she
was able to use her savings to pay her bills, but by the third year she found it very
difficult to pay for her bills, especially her home mortgage, which she was trying to
modify. Because of her bad feelings during her previous bankruptcy, she made a
decision to voluntarily dismiss this bankruptcy, which she did. (Tr at 30-33.) 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $160. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, writing that she had
engaged the services of the Lexington Law Firm to help her resolve her overdue debts.
She also wrote that she was notified that this debt was removed from her Trans Union
credit report. 
Applicant testified that she denied this allegation in her RSOR because she did
not recognize this debt. She confirmed that she has hired the Lexington Law Firm to
help her with all of her debts, because there was a great deal on her credit report that
she did not recognize. She indicated that at the time of the hearing, the Lexington Law
Firm has been helping her since August 2014, and she pays them $100 a month.
Applicant averred that she received an email from the Lexington Law Firm telling her
that after they had sent a letter to the creditor asking them to validate this debt, the debt
was removed from her credit report.  (Tr at 33-35, 50, 67.)  
Exhibit 3, a Credit Report, dated August 18, 2014, establishes that this overdue
debt has been owed by Applicant. Post-hearing Exhibit J from the Lexington Law Firm
indicates that this debt has been removed from the credit reports by Trans Union.
However, I do not find that sufficient evidence has been introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $233. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, writing that with the Lincoln
Law Firm’s help she was informed that this debt was removed from her Trans Union
and Equifax credit reports. 
Applicant testified that she denied this allegation in her RSOR because she did
not recognize this debt, and because the Lexington Law Firm told her that this debt was
removed from her credit report after being challenged. (Tr at 36-37.) 
Exhibit 3 establishes that this overdue debt has been owed by Applicant. Post-
hearing Exhibit J indicates that this debt has been removed from the credit reports by
Equifax. However, I do not find that sufficient evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
4
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account for a student
loan in the amount of $19,116. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR,
writing that she had student loans, but she did not believe the amount stated was
correct since the loan had originated in 1996, and she had been paying on the loans
until she became unemployed in 2010. She wrote that the Lexington Law Firm is trying
to help her confirm the origin and amount of this debt.
Applicant testified that, while her credit reports shows three different accounts for
student loans that she owes (listed on the SOR as 1.e., 1.f., and 1.I.),  she only actually
took out one loan. She stated that she had been making payments on this loan for
approximately 14 years until she was laid off, and she stopped making payments. She
averred, as she had written on her RSOR, that the Lexington Law Firm is trying to help
her confirm the origin and amount of this debt. Applicant stated that she did not have
any paperwork to establish the actual status of the student loans since she suffered a
fire in her home in 2003 that destroyed all of her documents. She confirmed that if the
student loan debts were established to be owing, she would be willing to pay these
debts. Applicant did testify that she spoke to a representative of these student loans and
she was told she has to make some payments for nine months to attempt to rehabilitate
these loans. At the time of the hearing, she had made three monthly payments of $10.
(Tr at 41-44, 71-76.)  
Exhibit 3 establishes that this overdue debt has been owed by Applicant. Post-
hearing Exhibit J from the Lexington Law Firm indicates that this debt has been
removed from the credit reports by Equifax. However, I do not find that sufficient
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account for a student
loan in the amount of $25,121. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR,
writing that she had student loans, but she did not believe the amount stated was
correct since the loan had originated in 1996, and she had been paying on the loans
until she became unemployed in 2010. She again wrote that the Lexington Law Firm is
trying to help her confirm the origin and amount of this debt. (See 1.e., above.)
Exhibit 3 establishes that this overdue debt has been owed by Applicant. No
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $342. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, writing that the Lexington
Law Firm was helping her to resolve her debts. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she denied this allegation in her RSOR
because she did not recognize this debt, and because the Lexington Law Firm told her
that this debt was removed from her credit report after being challenged. (Tr at 37.) 
Exhibit 3 establishes that this overdue debt has been owed by Applicant. Post-
hearing Exhibit J from the Lexington Law Firm indicates that this debt has been
removed from the credit reports by TransUnion and Equifax. However, I do not find that
5
sufficient evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or
reduced. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $4,328. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, writing that the Lexington
Law Firm was helping her to resolve her debts. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she believed that this debt was for an
automobile that she purchased approximately seven days before she was laid off. She
contended that she made the payments for a while, and retained the car for two years,
but then she voluntarily surrendered the vehicle. The vehicle was ultimately sold at
auction, and it appears that the amount due is the difference from what she owed when
she surrendered the vehicle and the amount sold at auction. Applicant testified that the
Lexington Law Firm is attempting to settle with the creditor of this debt, but it has not yet
been settled. Applicant confirmed that if the debt is validated by the creditor she would
be willing to pay it. (Tr at 38-41.) 
Exhibit 3 establishes that this overdue debt has been owed by Applicant. No
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a past-due account in the amount of
$14,534. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, writing that she had
student loans, but she did not believe the amount stated was correct since the loan had
originated in 1996, and she had been paying on the loans until she became unemployed
in 2010. She once more confirmed that the Lexington Law Firm is trying to help her
confirm the origin and amount of this debt. (See 1.e., above.)
Exhibit 2, a credit report, dated March 18, 2014, establishes that this overdue
debt has been owed by Applicant. No evidence has been introduced to establish that
this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $306. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, writing that with the
Lexington Law Firm’s help she was informed that this debt was removed from her Trans
Union credit report. 
None of the credit reports submitted by the Government lists this debt. I find that
the Government has not established that this debt is due and owing.
1.k.  As reviewed above, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR and
add one additional allegation, which was granted. This allegation states that Applicant’s
home with a mortgage of approximately $100,000 remaining on the debt was foreclosed
in June or July 2012. Applicant admitted this allegation, although she was not certain of
the date. (Tr at 57-64.) Post-hearing Exhibit F contains information regarding this
foreclosure, but it does not clearly establish if Applicant owes a debt. I do not find that
the Government has established that a debt is owed from this foreclosure. 
  
6
As reviewed above, Applicant testified that her financial difficulties occurred
because of a number of years when she was unemployed or underemployed. She
stated that at this time she is able to pay all of her current monthly expenses. (Tr at 47.) 
Mitigation
Applicant introduced a Certificate of Counseling, showing that she had received
financial counseling on March 9, 2013, in connection with the filing for bankruptcy.
(Exhibit A.) She also submitted a Personal Financial Statement showing a net monthly
remainder of $866 after her monthly expenses and debts were subtracted from her
income, although payments for her other outstanding debts, including for the significant
overdue debts of her student loan and her relinquished vehicle, were not included.
(Exhibit B.) Applicant also submitted four extremely laudatory characters letter from two
friends, a co-worker, and the mother of a patient. She was described as being “a very
honest and forthright individual.” (Exhibit K.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
7
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, most of which has been overdue
for several years. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s period of unemployment and underemployment could potentially make this
condition applicable in this case. However, Applicant took no action to resolve the
overdue debts for several years. While she has now engaged the services of a law firm
to help her resolve her overdue debts, and there is some evidence that some of the
smaller debts have been resolved; her most significant debts, the student loan and auto
8
debt, have not been settled or reduced. Accordingly, I do not find that Applicant has
acted responsibly. Therefore, this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
Additionally, I do not find that AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has not
“initiated a good-faith effort to repay the [majority of] overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.” Finally, I do not find any other mitigating condition applies to this case.
Until Applicant is able to resolve her overdue debts, I find Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to a classified position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has resolved the majority of past-due debts listed on the SOR, I
find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, under the whole person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.i.: Against  Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.j.-1.k.: For Applicant 
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
