 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06601 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, Department of 
Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
January 16, 2015, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On April 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 6, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 5. On July 22, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM 
and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply additional 
information. He did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on September 18, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had three delinquent debts totaling $29,367 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied each alleged debt.1 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He received an offer of employment from a defense 
contractor in December 2010. From the record, it is unknown whether he is now working 
for that contractor. In the past, he worked overseas for defense contractors for a 
number of years. He graduated from high school in 1994. He served on active duty in 
the U.S. Navy from 1996 to 2004 and in the Navy Reserve from 2004 to 2006. He 
received honorable discharges for his military service. He is divorced and has three 
children, ages 12, 15, and 17. He has held a security clearance in the past.2  
  
 SOR ¶ 1.a – delinquent account for $526. This was a credit card debt that was 
late over 120 days. Applicant’s credit report dated May 11, 2011, reflected that the date 
of last activity on the debt was December 2007. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that he contacted the creditor about this debt and was told he had no account 
with that creditor. He believes this was his ex-wife’s account. The creditor would not 
disclose information to him about his ex-wife’s accounts. Applicant’s credit report dated 
September 19, 2014, no longer reflects this debt.3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account for $13,015. This was a charged-off loan from a 
credit union that had a date of last activity of July 2004. While deployed on a ship, 
Applicant’s wife stopped making payments on this loan. He reported this debt on his 
security clearance application and indicated he was making monthly payments to 
resolve it. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated the debt was satisfied in 
November 2012. He also provided a letter from the creditor reflecting this debt has been 
resolved.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $15,826. This was a student loan that was 
past due $5,643 and had a date of last activity of January 2007. In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant indicated that he contacted the creditor about this debt and was told he 
                                                          
1 Item 1. 
 
2 Items 2, 3.  
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4, 5.   
 
4 Items 1, 3, 4.   
 
 
3 
 
 
had no account with them. He contacted another company that handles student loans 
and was told this account belonged to his ex-wife, that Applicant co-signed the loan with 
her, and that it had been satisfied. Applicant’s credit report dated September 19, 2014, 
no longer reflects this debt.5 
 
 Applicant attributed his debts to his ex-wife’s financial mismanagement, although 
he acknowledged that he should have monitored the accounts better. His credit report 
dated September 19, 2014, reflected that he has no delinquent debts. He also stated 
that none of the alleged debts were reflected on his credit report when he purchased a 
home in April 2014.6 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that he received financial counseling. He did not 
provide a monthly budget. It is unknown whether he has any discretionary income 
remaining each month after payment of his expenses.7  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
5 Items 1, 3, 4, 5.  
 
6 Items 3, 5.   
 
7 Items 1-5. 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” See ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The record evidence established two disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided proof that he resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. His most recent 
credit report reflects that he has no delinquent debts and supports his contention that 
the remaining alleged debts are resolved. He recently purchased a home. He appears 
to be financially stable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) apply.  AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20 partially 
apply. Insufficient evidence was presented to establish AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.8 After giving due consideration to the information about Applicant in the 
                                                          
8 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
 
6 
 
 
record, I conclude that Applicant has met his burden of persuasion and mitigated the 
Guideline F security concerns.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
