 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-03987   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 25, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated seven delinquent debts totaling $34,088. She also failed 
to file her 2013 Federal tax return in a timely manner. The debts were incurred due to a 
contentious divorce and several periods of unemployment. Applicant has acted 
responsibly, given the circumstances. She documented she resolved $32,520 in debt. 
She has filed her 2013 Federal income tax return. Resulting security concerns were 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 20, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On November 17, 2014, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on December 11, 2014. (Item 2.) She 
requested that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
May 6, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items, was received by Applicant on May 8, 2015. She was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
of her receipt of the FORM. She provided additional information in response to the 
FORM within the 30-day period, marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE A, and it was admitted into the record. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on August 5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. She earned a master’s degree in 2009. She has been 
employed with a Government contractor since January 2014. She was married to her 
first husband from 1982 until their divorce in 1989. She married her second husband in 
1991. They divorced in 2006. She has two children, ages 17 and 20. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant attributed her delinquent accounts to her 2006 divorce which left her a 
single mother supporting her children with little financial assistance, and her 
unemployment. She experienced several periods of unemployment including: October 
2013 to January 2014; April 2009 to August 2009; September 2007 to June 2008; 
September 2005 to March 2006; and November 2004 to January 2005. (Item 3.) Her 
most recent periods of unemployment are attributable to lay-offs between contracts and 
were beyond her control.  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant owes approximately $34,088 in delinquent debt on 
seven delinquent financial obligations. It also alleged that Applicant failed to file her 
2013 Federal income tax return. In her Answer, Applicant denied all of the allegations. 
Her debts are documented in the record credit reports dated October 7, 2014; and 
February 26, 2014. (Items 4 and 5.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on six accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 
1.e, 1.f, and 1.g) in the total amount of $5,741. In her Answer, she provided proof that 
she resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e, totaling $2,597. She also 
provided documentation that she is current on her mortgage debt, which was alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f to be delinquent in the amount of $1,576. She claimed to have paid the $695 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and provided a confirmation number. She denied the final 
consumer debt of $873, identified in SOR ¶ 1.g, stating, “I do not have an account that 
is in collection and I have no balance due with this company.” That debt, allegedly 
 
 
3 
 
 
delinquent since July 2013, is not listed on her October 7, 2014 credit report. (Answer; 
Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was also alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to have a Federal tax lien entered 
against her in February 2009 in the approximate amount of $28,347. The tax debt was 
for the 2000 tax year. She attributed the delinquency to her second husband’s 
undisclosed gambling winnings. She provided documentation that shows the lien was 
released on October 1, 2014. She solely repaid this joint tax obligation, without the help 
of her former spouse. (Answer; AE A; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant filed her 2013 Federal and state income tax returns late, in December 
2014. She did not state why she failed to file her 2013 Federal and state taxes in a 
timely manner. She set up an installment agreement with the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) to pay her tax obligation for 2013 through automatic withdrawals from her bank 
account. She owed $2,629 for 2013. She pays the IRS $500 monthly and has made at 
least two payments under the installment agreement. She also presented evidence that 
shows her 2014 Federal income tax return was filed and that it was paid in full. (AE A.) 
Applicant’s October 7, 2014 credit report reflects no new delinquencies. Further, there 
don’t appear to be any new revolving credit accounts. (Item 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
 Applicant accumulated seven delinquent debts totaling $34,088. Her oldest debt, 
a $28,347 Federal tax obligation, had been delinquent since 2001. These debts 
establish both a history of delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy her 
 
 
5 
 
 
obligations. Further, she failed to file her 2013 Federal tax return in a timely manner. 
The evidence raises security concerns under the above conditions, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following provide some 
mitigation: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts were caused by her ex-husband’s undisclosed gambling 
winnings and her recent periods of unemployment. She has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She documented that she resolved $32,520 of those debts, and 
provided a confirmation number along with a claim to have resolved an additional $695. 
While she failed to provide documentation showing the basis for her dispute of her 
remaining $873 debt, it no longer appears on her credit report. She filed her 2013 and 
2014 Federal tax returns. Her diligent efforts to resolve her debts show that her financial 
problems are under control and are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s former indebtedness 
does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The 
security concerns with respect to her financial delinquencies are mitigated. The above 
conditions apply. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant experienced 
financial difficulties from 2000 to present, due to situations beyond her control. She has 
acted responsibly by resolving her Federal tax obligation that resulted from her ex-
husband’s receiving, and hiding, his gambling winnings. She has also resolved the 
majority of her other delinquent debts. The most recent credit report in evidence reflects 
no new debts or delinquencies. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as 
to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. She met her 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
