 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 14-05696 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has been unable or unwilling to resolve 24 of 28 alleged delinquent 
debts. She failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial security 
concerns. She mitigated the personal conduct issues relating to her failure to disclose 
delinquent debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On January 28, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for reinvestigation. On December 12, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On February 20, 2015, Applicant answered all allegations in Paragraph 1 of the 
SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). On March 18, 2015, she submitted an answer 
to the allegation contained in Paragraph 2 of the SOR. On April 27, 2015, the 
Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s 
case to me. On June 5, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the case for July 
1, 2015. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 10 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through E into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objection. The record 
remained open until July 21, 2015, to give Applicant time to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted one exhibit with 12 pages that I marked as AE F, 
and admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on July 9, 2015.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted 13 of the SOR allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of the 
SOR, and denied the remaining 15 allegations. She denied the allegation in Paragraph 
2 of the SOR. Her admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where she has 
worked since September 2011. She has two adult children from her first marriage, 
which ended in 2006. She married her second husband in 2007 and has a stepson. She 
and her husband separated in 2014. She completed a master’s degree in May 2014. 
She worked as a federal government employee from the time she was 17 years old until 
2002. Subsequently, she worked for other defense contractors. She has held a security 
clearance for many years during her employment. Prior to obtaining her current position 
she was unemployed for 18 months.1 Her husband was unemployed from May 2010 to 
June 2013. (Tr. 23-27.) 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to the long period that she and her 
husband were unemployed. She said that during that period she also cared for her sick 
mother and recuperated from her own surgery, which contributed to the financial issues. 
She testified that said period was extremely stressful for her. (Tr. 29; GE 2.)  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, dating back to at least 1996. In 
January 2014 she completed Interrogatories requested by the federal government. She 
addressed questions regarding judgments from 1996 and 1997, and a 2001 
garnishment and provided proof that the matters were resolved.2 
                                                 
1During an interview in February 2013, Applicant told an investigator that she was unemployed from May 
2011 to August 2012. (GE 2.) In her Answer, she said she was unemployed from March 2010 to 
September 2012. (Answer.) 
2The SOR does not allege these previous matters. Any matters that were not alleged will not be 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports, from February 2013 and March 2008, the SOR 
alleged 28 delinquent debts, which became delinquent between 2008 and 2013, and 
totaled $78,560. They include judgments, credit card debts, unpaid medical bills, a 
defaulted car loan, and unpaid cell phone debts. (GE 4, 7.) A summary of the status of 
the debts follows. 
 
 Applicant is resolving four SOR-alleged debts. The judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.j 
for $11,751 is being paid and resolved through a garnishment. The balance is $555. 
(AE F.) The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.aa appears to be a duplicate of the judgment. (Tr. 
74.) The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.r for $1,126 is owed to a department store. She is 
settling the debt for $401 and made her first payment of $66 in July 2015. (AE F.) She is 
litigating the $29,863 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.x. It relates to a secondary mortgage that 
she and her husband obtained for their residence. (Tr. 60; AE B.) These debts total 
$53,783.   
 
 Applicant asserted that some of the other 24 debts are paid, or are not her debts, 
and could be her mother’s debts. She also said that some could be her sister-in-law’s 
debts because she shares the same name as Applicant. She stated that some are 
duplicates, and she has no knowledge of one or two debts. She acknowledged owing 
many of the medical debts. She did not present credible evidence verifying her 
assertions or that any of the 24 delinquent debts are resolved, being resolved, are 
duplicates, or were successfully resolved in her favor after formally disputing them.  
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $74,000. She does not have a budget and has not 
participated in credit or financial counseling. (Tr. 34, 36.) Applicant and her husband 
owe federal taxes for 2014.3 She does not know the amount because her husband is 
paying the debt. (Tr. 38.) Applicant’s student loans, which total about $85,000, are 
deferred. She may go back to school in the fall. (Tr. 78.) 
 
 In addition to the financial security concerns raised in the SOR, the Government 
also alleged that Applicant intentionally falsified her 2013 e-QIP because she did not 
disclose the SOR-listed debts, which were over 120 days old, as requested. She did 
disclose her mortgage problem. (GE 1.) In her Answer, Applicant denied that she 
intentionally attempted to deceive the Government. While testifying, she said that when 
she completed the e-QIP in January 2013, she was not certain she was mentally stable, 
having lost her mother and sister within the previous six months. She said she was 
unemployed at the time, and unsure of her financial state. She reiterated that she was 
not attempting to hide information. (Tr. 75.)   
 
                                                                                                                                                             
considered in an analysis of disqualifying conditions. They may be considered in my analysis of mitigating 
conditions and the whole- person concept. 
3 The SOR does not allege unpaid taxes and will not be considered in an analysis of disqualifying 
conditions. They may be considered in my analysis of mitigating conditions and the whole-person 
concept. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
  Applicant testified honestly. She submitted her 2014 performance evaluation. It 
recorded her performance as “Significantly Exceeded Commitments.” (AE C.) Her 
composite rating score was “4.4/5.0.” (AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies began before 2008, and most of them remain 
unresolved. Since then she has been unwilling or unable to resolve most of the 
delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifications, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems have been ongoing since before 2008 and 
continue to date; hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not provide mitigation. There is evidence to 
indicate that Applicant’s and her husband’s long periods of unemployment, which 
spanned from May 2010 to September 2013, were circumstances beyond her control. 
However, she did not explain what steps she took from 2008 to 2013 to responsibly 
manage her financial obligations as they accumulated. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) provides 
minimal mitigation. Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling, and 
does not have a budget or reasonable plan to address the unresolved debts. The 
evidence does not demonstrate that her finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) does not provide mitigation for 24 of the alleged 28 debts, as 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence that she initiated or adequately made a 
good-faith effort to address them. Normally, resolving debts through garnishments is not 
considered “a good-faith effort” to repay creditors. However, in this instance Applicant’s 
garnishment is almost paid, which establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) for the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. (The debt is also alleged in SOR ¶ 1.aa.) She recently made 
a good-faith effort to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.r, establishing some mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d) for that debt. Applicant is legally disputing the $29,863 debt SOR ¶ 1.x. 
Hence, AG ¶ 20(e) has application to it. She did not provide evidence to substantiate 
other debts she stated likely did not belong to her or which she successfully disputed. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2(a) that Applicant falsified her 2013 e-QIP by 
failing to disclose her delinquent debts, thereby raising a potential disqualification under 
AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
Applicant denied the allegation. She attributed the omission to her state of mind 
at the time she submitted the e-QIP. She said she was stressed and not thinking clearly 
as a consequence of personal issues. After listening to her testify and observing her 
demeanor, I find her explanation credible. She disclosed an adverse mortgage problem, 
and freely spoke of her problems during the personal appearance. Her failure to 
disclose the information does not appear to be the result of an intentional action, but 
rather a negligent one. This guideline is found in her favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and 
educated 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has held a security 
clearance while working for the Government for many years. Her 2014 performance 
evaluation is impressive.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 While those are favorable facts to consider in granting her a clearance, Applicant 
has a long history of financial problems, which date back to 1996. While some of the 
more current delinquent debts are attributable to a period of unemployment, she has not 
demonstrated responsible management of her finances and debts from 2008 to the 
present. Without a reasonable budget and solid plan for resolving these problems, there 
is a strong likelihood that similar issues will recur and call into question her judgment. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with concerns as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:    Against Applicant 
          Subparagraph 1.j:                           For Applicant 
          Subparagraphs 1.k through 1.q:     Against Applicant 
          Subparagraph 1.r:                           For Applicant 
          Subparagraphs 1.s through v:         Against Applicant 
          Subparagraph 1.x:                      For Applicant  
          Subparagraphs 1.y and 1.z:            Against Applicant 
                    Subparagraph 1.aa:                      For Applicant  
          Subparagraph 1.bb:                        Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
