1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-03767
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 3, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On October 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F  for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On November 19, 2014, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)
On May 19, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. On May
21, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to
Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits. (Items
1-5.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on July 28, 2015. Applicant
timely submitted several documents, including: a two page letter from Applicant, I have
identified as Item A, a single letter from Applicant (Item B), a letter regarding Applicant’s
2
student loans (Item C), a second letter regarding Applicant’s student loans (Item D), and
a receipt for proof of payment (Item E). All of the Items were admitted into evidence
without objection. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on June 29,
2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 28 years old. He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks
a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists three allegations (1.a. through 1.c.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts totaling approximately $23,000, under Adjudicative Guideline
F. The debts will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $21,923. In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation. He wrote that he has
spent the last year bringing this debt for a student loan out of default, and as of July 30,
2014, this debt was in good standing. Item C, a letter from the manager for the creditor
showed that Applicant’s loan was rehabilitated on July 30, 2014, and his first payment
was due on September 13, 2014. The final letter from the creditor’s manager, dated
May 28, 2015, establishes that Applicant made five monthly payments  of $127.32, and
the total balance remaining is $20,872.62. (Item D.) Item E established that Applicant’s
most recent payment was made on May 13, 2015, and his next payment will be due on
June 13, 2015. I find that Applicant’s student loan has been rehabilitated, and he is now
responsibly making monthly payments according to the plan. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$700. In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, writing that this debt is
being addressed. (Item 2.) I find that this debt is still outstanding, and Applicant must act
responsibly to resolve this debt.
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$342. In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, writing that this debt is also
being addressed. (Item 2.) I find that this debt is still outstanding, and Applicant must act
responsibly to resolve this debt.
Applicant wrote in his RSOR that his overdue debts were as a result of his
pursuing a better education and health emergencies. (Item 2.)
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt which was unsatisfied for a
period of time. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” No
evidence was furnished by Applicant as to the cause of these overdue debts. Therefore,
I do not find that this mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case.
There is evidence that Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors. I find that AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable since Applicant has rehabilitated his
student loan, and he now has a history of several months making the required
payments according to the payment plan. Therefore, I find Guideline F for Applicant.
However, Applicant has to continue making his monthly payments according to
the plan and also resolve the other two overdue medical debts in a responsible manner
if he wishes to retain his security clearance.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
5
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigating condition is applicable and controlling, I find that the
record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the
whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.: For  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
