 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04988 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 16, 2013, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP). On January 15, 2015, the Department of Defense issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F, H, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 24, 2015. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On June 17, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 8, 
was provided to the Applicant on July 15, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on July 22, 2015. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 
day time allowed that would have expired on August 21, 2015. Department Counsel had 
no objection to these exhibits being entered into the record. I received the case 
assignment on September 1, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3. He offered 
comments on Paragraphs 2 and 3 in his defense. (Items 1-4)  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and a defense contractor employee for the past two 
years. He is not married. He has one child who was born in 2012. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant has seven delinquent debts totaling $20,628 as listed in the SOR. He 
admitted all of them. He did not list any of them in his e-QIP in Section 26 of the 
document pertaining to financial delinquencies. His Answer stated he must have been 
confused by the question. (Items 4, 5) 
 
 The delinquent debts include about $14,700 owed to a bank on two credit cards 
from 2008 and 2010 (Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b.). He owes another credit card issuer 
$1,924 from 2008 (Subparagraph 1.c). Applicant owes a debt collector $1,298 for 2010 
on an account (Subparagraph 1.d). He owes another bank $1,285 from 2010 
(Subparagraph 1.e). Applicant owes a debt collector $920 from 2012 (Subparagraph 
1.f). He also owes an auto lender $323 from 2006 (Subparagraph 1.g). He has not 
resolved any of these debts. (Items 4, 6, 7) 
 
 Applicant admitted in his e-QIP, in response to Section 23 about the use of illegal 
drugs, that he used marijuana “once in a while, recreationally.” He stated he used it 
from June 2003 to January 2013. He started working for his current employer in July 
2013. In his Answer, Applicant admitted the use of marijuana but claims he quit using it 
in 2006. He did not provide any information to support this difference between his 
Answer and his e-QIP. Therefore, I find Applicant used marijuana from 2003 to 2013, a 
period of ten years. (Item 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose on the e-QIP in Section 26 his seven financial 
delinquencies. He admitted to using an illegal drug, marijuana, for ten years. His 
Answer claims he was confused by the question or misunderstood the financial and 
illegal drug use questions. His Response consisted of the SOR with his comments 
regarding Guideline E that “the terminology and paper work was confusing [and] I had 
no intention of lying.” The questions are clear in the information they seek. The e-QIP 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
contains in the signature block the statement that the Applicant’s answers therein are 
“true, complete, and correct” and made in good faith. Applicant did not answer the e-
QIP in that manner on these two sections. (Items 4, 5; Response) 
 
 Applicant included in his Response a written statement asserting that he did not 
intend to lie on his e-QIP. He found the e-QIP “overwhelming and some of the 
terminology and phrasing had me a bit confused.” He claims he is doing well in his job 
and has two daughters to take care of now. He claims he would not use drugs now 
because of his daughters and his desire to be a role model for them. His e-QIP lists only 
one child. He stated he stopped smoking marijuana before he was hired for his current 
position. Applicant wants to continue in his job and promises to remain focused and 
determined in his work. (Response) 
  
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 Department Counsel submitted eight Items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 8 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on August 9, 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as his 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this 
Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated seven delinquent debts, 
totaling $20,628 that remain unpaid or unresolved. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) are established.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
Applicant did not offer any documents or statements to show he had arranged to pay 
any of his delinquent debts. He did not demonstrate that the debts occurred under such 
conditions that they do not cast doubt on his good judgment and reliability (AG ¶ 20 (a)). 
He did not show the financial conditions were beyond his control and he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances (AG ¶ 20 (b)). As stated above, there is no 
financial counseling shown (AG ¶ 20 (c)). Applicant did not show any efforts to repay 
the debts, so AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. There is nothing to show a reasonable basis 
for debt disputes (AG ¶ 20 (e)), nor any affluence from a legal source (AG¶ 20 (f)), so 
these mitigating conditions are not established.   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition applies: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition)  
 
 Applicant admitted on his e-QIP that he used marijuana “recreationally” from 
2003 to 2013, until just before starting his current job. His Response confirms that time 
of use. His Answer attempted to redefine the use period to 2006, but the evidence is 
clear by his own admissions that the period of use was 2003 to 2013. AG ¶ 25 (a) is 
established.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None of 
them are established. His use was continuous over a decade. AG ¶ 26 (a) is not 
established. He did not demonstrate by any statement in any document that he would 
not abuse drugs in the future, even though he claims he has two daughters and would 
not use drugs now because he wants to be a role model for them. AG ¶ 26 (b) is not 
established. There is no evidence of prescription drug use alleged in the SOR or 
discussed in any response to the SOR. AG ¶ 26 (c) is not established. Applicant did not 
participate in any prescribed drug treatment program. AG ¶ 26 (d) is not established. 
None of these mitigating conditions are established as they are set forth in Guideline H.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant did not disclose his financial delinquencies in Section 
26 of the e-QIP and acted improperly by using marijuana from 2003 to 2013. These are 
the two personal conduct issues to be evaluated. 
 
First, Applicant did not disclose his financial delinquencies as alleged in SOR 
Paragraph 1. He has seven delinquent debts totaling $20,628 that he incurred from 
2008 onward. Applicant did not demonstrate by any documents he submitted that he 
was unable to repay these debts. He claims he was confused by the question on the e-
QIP about his delinquencies, but he never explained the confusion and why he did not 
list his unresolved debts on the e-QIP.  
 
Second, his personal conduct in using marijuana for a decade until 2013 made 
him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by engaging in conduct that 
affects his personal and professional standing in Applicant’s community. These two 
disqualifying conditions are established.  
 
 There are seven mitigation conditions listed in Guideline E. None of them are 
established by Applicant to apply to him. He did not make prompt good-faith efforts to 
correct his omissions. AG ¶ 17 (a) is not established. He did not have any legal advice 
or from an authorized person to conceal the requested information. AG ¶ 17 (b) is not 
established. His offense is not minor, occurring long ago, or infrequent, so it does cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 17 (c) is not 
established. Applicant has not taken any positive objective steps to alleviate the two 
conditions or reduce his vulnerability. AG ¶ 17 (e) is not established. The last two 
mitigating conditions do not apply under the facts in the case, so AG ¶ 17 (f) and (g) are 
not established. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts and smoked the marijuana.  
 
Applicant has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This inaction 
leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on the 
magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past seven years. 
 
Applicant used marijuana for a decade. He used it until 2013 and now claims he 
stopped using it before he was hired into his current position. There is no objective 
evaluation to support any of his claims. Between his e-QIP, his Answer, and now his 
Response to the FORM, he changed his story about when he quit using marijuana 
twice. First it was in 2013, then 2006, and now back to 2013. His credibility is seriously 
undermined by the constant variations in his story.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations Drug Involvement, or Personal Conduct. I conclude the 
whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
