 
1 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04944 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Her past-due 
mortgage was settled by a deed of trust. A vehicle repossession resulted in a $7,500 
refund. Although other delinquent accounts have yet to be paid, Applicant has mitigated 
the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on November 17, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On December 5, 
2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On February 22, 2015, I 
was assigned the case. On June 18, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing convened on July 9, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
A through Q were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The 
record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. No Additional 
material was received. On July 17, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she denied one charged-off account (SOR 
1.d, $7,892), asserted one debt (SOR 1.c, $30) was paid, and admitted the remaining 
SOR delinquent accounts. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old senior systems engineer who was employed by a 
defense contractor. She seeks to obtain a security clearance. From May 1993 through 
May 2003, she honorably served in the U.S. Navy, separating as petty officer second 
class, (E-5). (Ex. 3, Tr. 20, 25) She receives $258 monthly in disability payments from 
the U.S. Department of Veteran’s Affairs for her service connected disability rated at 20 
per cent (Tr. 25). 
 
In March 2014, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Ex. 1) She indicated she had financial problems and 
listed six of the SOR debts. (Ex. 1) Her March 2014 credit report listed a vehicle 
repossession, late payments on four accounts, seven collection accounts, and thirty-six 
accounts listed as timely paid. (Ex. 3) 
 
Applicant and her ex-husband were married 13 years. (Ex. 20) They met when 
both were serving in the U.S. Navy. (Tr. 25) from 2005 through 2008, after leaving the 
military, she worked for a time with the same contractor in 2013 and 2014. (Tr. 20) 
Following the 2007 birth of her son, Applicant was a stay-at-home mother.  
 
In April 2012, Applicant’s then-husband quit his job, which had been paying 
$150,000 annually. Until that point, all their accounts were timely paid. (Tr. 20) Her 
September 2005 credit report does not list any derogatory financial information. (Ex. 2) 
Her then-husband was unemployed until October 2012, when he obtained a position 
with an annual salary of $119,000. While unemployed, he received $1,800 monthly 
unemployment compensation. In July 2012, Applicant and her husband entered a “Keep 
Your Home” state unemployment program that paid the first mortgage on their home. 
(Ex. J) The monthly mortgage payment was $2,727. (Ex. H) 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s husband was employed from October 2012 through January 2013. 
He was then out of work for two months. In March 2013, he obtained a new position 
with a net monthly pay of approximately $18,000.2 (Ex. Q) In April 2013, Applicant 
discovered her husband was hiding money from her. (Tr. 21) She withdrew the bulk of 
the discovered money and used it to pay their bills. (Tr. 23) 
 
In January 2013, Applicant’s husband left the family home after 13 years of 
marriage, and in July 2013, he filed for divorce. (Tr. 20, 22) In May 2013, her husband 
was again unemployed. Applicant’s ex-husband has failed to honor his $2,500 monthly 
child support obligation and a $5,745 monthly spousal support obligation. (Tr. 24) As of 
December 2014, he was more than $46,500 delinquent on his support obligations. She 
has sought assistance from the state child support service, which has contacted the 
corresponding state agency in her ex-husband’s state. That state then took her ex-
husband’s driver’s license. (Tr. 35) The state’s next step is to commence a garnishment 
action. (Tr. 35) 
 
In September 2013, Applicant obtained a three-month job working for a school 
district, which paid $10 per hour. (Tr. 23) She wanted to bring the bank consolidation 
loan (SOR 1.b, $28,966) current but was too far behind on missed payments to do so. 
(Tr. 29) In December 2013, she obtained a job with an $80,000 annual salary. (Ex. M, 
N) In April 2014, she was laid off from that job. The company’s president and CEO 
wrote a letter of recommendation stating Applicant had previously worked for the 
company in 2005.3 The CEO states Applicant’s work performance was outstanding and 
Applicant showed great personality, character, education, and exemplified great 
credibility. (Ex. K) 
 
In October 2014, Applicant received financial counseling. (Ex. O, Tr. 40) In 
counseling she learned about budgeting, loss of employment, responsibility for debts, 
and how to bring obligations current. (Tr. 40) When unemployed, she received $1,044 
monthly unemployment compensation. (Ex. I) She currently lives with her mother and 
has contemplated filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. (Tr. 34) The financial hardships 
required her son to be removed from many after-school activities and the 
discontinuance of cable television. (Tr. 41) She currently receives monthly public 
assistance in the form of approximately $500 in cash payment and approximately $300 
in food stamps. She has been offered a hospital job paying $43,000 annually with the 
job starting the week following the hearing. (Ex. L, Tr. 27) 
 
Applicant owed $367,500 on the first mortgage (SOR 1.a) and $88,000 on the 
second mortgage (SOR 1.h). In January 2015, Applicant received notice of a “Trustee’s 
Deed Upon Sale.” (Ex. B) Upon resale of the home, $358,000 was paid on a debt of 
approximately $406,000. (Ex. B, Tr. 28) Since this action, she has not been contacted 
                                                          
2 The job offer lists a $125,000 base salary for 40 hours per week, but the job required work up to 84 
hours per week with all hours after 40 being paid at $60.00 per hour. (Ex. Q) 
 
3 In 2005, after leaving the U.S. Navy, Applicant worked for the same company, and resumed 
employment with this company in December 2013. (Ex. K) 
 
4 
 
by either mortgage company. (Tr. 27) There was also a $50,000 swimming pool loan 
(SOR 1.i) that was charged off. (Tr. 33) She would like to resolve the swimming pool 
debt, but has no resources to do so. (Tr. 33) The divorce decree divided this loan 
obligation equally. (Ex. H) 
 
In May 2007, Applicant and her husband purchased a vehicle for approximately 
$34,000. Payments were timely made until October 2013. (Ex. 3) The vehicle was 
repossessed and sold. Following the sale, her ex-husband received a $7,500 refund 
because the value of the vehicle following sale exceeded the amount due on the 
vehicle. (Ex. E, Tr. 33) 
 
In December 2014, the $30 collection debt (SOR 1.c) was paid. (Ex. C, Tr. 30) 
The debt consolidation loan (SOR 1.b, $28,966) remains unpaid. (Tr. 30) Applicant has 
been in communication with the creditor, but the creditor wanted a lump-sum payment 
which was beyond her ability to pay. (Tr. 30) She denies owing the $7,892 credit card 
account (SOR 1.d). (Tr. 30) There are two credit card collection accounts with this 
creditor. She had one credit card (SOR 1.k, $9,983) and her husband had his own card, 
which he opened on his own without her being an authorized user of the card. (Tr. 30, 
37) The divorce decree required each to pay their own account. (Tr. 36) In October 
2014, the collection agency offered to settle the debt on her account for $6,000, divided 
into 12 monthly payments, but Applicant has been unable to accept the offer, and she is 
unable to make the requested payments. (Ex. F, Tr. 35) 
 
The $3,000 charged-off account (SOR 1.e) remains unpaid. (Tr. 31) the account 
was opened for maintenance on Applicant’s vehicle. She is $517 past-due on a $2,300 
credit card account, which remains unpaid. (Tr. 12) The creditor of the approximate 
$8,000 credit card debt (SOR 1.l) brought suit for recovery of the debt. After Applicant 
explained her financial status, the creditor requested the suit be dismissed. (Ex. G, Tr. 
34) 
 
Applicant was paying on a credit card account (SOR 1.f $492 past due on $1,759 
balance) until it went delinquent in 2013. Applicant arranged a repayment agreement on 
the past-due account. In May 2013, she started making $37 monthly payments and 
continued until being laid off in August 2014. (Ex. D, Tr. 31) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
5 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant was past due on her first 
($367,000) and second ($88,000) mortgages, had a $50,000 charged-off loan, and was 
delinquent on other collection and past-due accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 Until 2012, all of Applicant’s accounts were timely paid. Starting in April 2012, her 
then-husband went through a period of short-term employment and unemployment. At 
that time, Applicant was a stay-at-home mother. In January 2013, her then-husband left 
the family home after 13 years of marriage and in July 2013 they divorced. Her ex-
husband is more than $46,000 behind on his support payments. Applicant was 
unemployed and had low-paying jobs until December 2013 when she secured a position 
for five months. The job paid $80,000 annually, but ended in April 2014 due to 
Applicant’s failure to have a security clearance. Following the hearing, she expected to 
start a job paying $40,000 annually. 
 
 Applicant is no longer liable on her mortgage there having been issued a 
Trustee’s Deed Upon Sale. The amount received from the sale of the vehicle exceeded 
the amount owed on the vehicle. The 2013 vehicle repossession resulted in her ex-
husband receiving $7,500. She was never on her husband’s credit card (SOR 1.d) and 
her divorce degree stated she was liable for her account, and he was liable for his 
account. The creditor offered to settle this credit card debt for $6,000, but she has had 
insufficient funds to accept and make payment on the offer. She paid a collection 
account (SOR 1.c). She would like to pay the remaining debt, but has not been 
sufficiently employed to address her past-due obligations.  
 
Because Applicant has multiple delinquent debts and her financial problems are 
continuing in nature, she receives minimal application of the mitigating conditions listed 
in AG ¶ 20(a). Under AG & 20(b), in 2013, Applicant separated, divorced, and 
experienced the financial burden associated therewith. Since the divorce, her ex-
husband has failed to meet his support obligations. Until the separation in 2012, all 
financial obligations were timely paid. The divorce and lack of employment were 
conditions beyond her control. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and &20(d), Applicant paid one debt, received a refund 
following a vehicle repossession, and is no longer liable on her past-due mortgage 
obligations. She has received financial counseling. She still has some sizable 
obligations yet to address. To this point her unemployment and under employment4 has 
prevented her from bring her debts current. Based on her financial history prior to her 
divorce and on the recommendations of the president of the company she worked for in 
2013 and 2014, I believe she will honor her financial obligations when she has the 
                                                          
4 In ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal Board addressed a situation where an 
applicant, who had been sporadically unemployed and lacked the ability to pay her creditors, noting that “it will be a 
long time at best before she has paid” all of her creditors. The applicant was living on unemployment compensation 
at the time of her hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having 
access to classified information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to 
develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that 
an applicant act responsibly given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious 
intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 
8 
 
ability to do so. She has received offers lowering the amount of debt listed in the SOR, 
but lack of employment prevented her from accepting the offers. AG & 20(c) and & 
20(d) apply. 
 
Applicant has challenged one collection account. There were two separate 
accounts with the same creditor. Applicant had one credit card and her ex-husband had 
another. She was not an authorized user on his card. The mitigating condition listed in 
AG ¶ 20(e) requires documentation concerning disputed accounts. She provided a copy 
of her divorce decree indicating she was to pay her account, and her husband was to 
pay his account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
She honorably served in the U.S. Navy and currently receives disability payment for that 
service. The debts incurred were not the type that indicates poor self-control. The only 
questionable purchase and loan was for the swimming pool. However, at the time the 
loan was made her then-husband was making $150,000 annually, and the housing 
market in the state had yet to go into crisis.  
 
Applicant would like to pay her debts, but her unemployment, under employment, 
and lack of support payments has made that impossible. She moved in with her mother 
to save money and curtailed her son’s after-school activities. Circumstances placed her 
in a position making it impossible to make larger payments. She is no longer liable on 
the largest SOR obligations, those relating to her delinquent mortgages. And the 
repossession of her vehicle resulted in a refund and not a liability.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid—it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
 
9 
 
2(a)(1).) Applicant has kept in contact with her creditors. I must reasonably consider the 
entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and her actions in evaluating the extent to 
which she has acted reasonably under the circumstances.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
