 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-06540 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations). Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Based on a review of Applicant’s e-QIP and the 
ensuing investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 3, 2015, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged trustworthiness 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On February 27, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 8, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 6. On July 1, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM 
and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply additional 
information. He did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on September 10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 18 delinquent debts totaling $35,383 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.r). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.d and essentially denied the remaining debts. Applicant’s e-QIP and his credit reports 
dated July 13, 2013, and May 12, 2014, contain substantial evidence of the alleged 
debts.1 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old father of two children, ages 15 and 17. When he 
submitted his e-QIP, he was unemployed and presumably was seeking employment 
with a federal contractor. He graduated from high school in June 1993. He served on 
active duty in the Army from September 1993 to October 1996 and in the inactive Army 
Reserve from October 1996 to September 2001. He received honorable discharges for 
his military service. He attended college from August 2003 to May 2006. He began 
attending college again in March 2013, but had not earned a degree by the time he 
submitted his e-QIP. He married in June 1999 and divorced in April 2007. He has held a 
security clearance in the past.2  
 
 In April 2009, Applicant resigned from his job and moved back to his parents’ 
home when he learned his stepfather had cancer. He lived there until September 2011. 
After his stepfather passed away, he began residing in another location with a 
roommate. He was fired from a job that he held from March 2010 to January 2013 
because of his excessive internet usage. He remained unemployed until he submitted 
his e-QIP.3 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that, upon moving back to his 
parents’ home, he could no longer afford to make the payments on the vehicle loan in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. He also indicated that the vehicle was voluntarily repossessed after he 
explained his situation to the creditor. A credit report dated May 12, 2014, reflected that 
this debt was past due in the amount of $10,578 and had a date of last activity of 
August 2009. The credit report also reflected the vehicle was involuntarily repossessed. 
Applicant claimed he disputed this debt and it no longer appears on his credit report. He 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 2, 5, 6. The $389 lien in SOR ¶ 1.e is reflected in the credit report dated May 12, 2014, but 
the holder of that lien, which is alleged in the SOR, is not reflected in that credit report.  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 4   
 
 
3 
 
 
failed to provide documents supporting his claim that this debt was removed from his 
credit report or that showed he had a legitimate basis for disputing it.4   
  
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that he disputed the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.f through 1.l, and 1.o through 1.q, and that they have been removed from his 
credit report. However, he failed to provide documentation that showed he had a 
legitimate basis for disputing those debts. His Answer also indicated that he paid the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.e and would pay the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, but he provided no 
proof of payments.5 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that the student loans in SOR ¶¶ 
1.m and 1.n were consolidated, and they were current. He provided a document 
confirming the consolidated loans are in deferment until August 2017. He also provided 
proof that he was making regular payments from October 2014 to February 2015 on the 
$1,241 in child support arrearages listed in SOR ¶ 1.r and the remaining balance was 
$198.6  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that he received financial counseling. It is 
unknown whether Applicant is currently employed. He did not provide a monthly budget. 
It is unknown whether he has any discretionary income remaining each month after 
payment of his expenses.7  
 
Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) In a memorandum dated November 19, 2004, the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) indicated that trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply the procedures contained in the Directive before making a 
determination. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
                                                          
4 Item  6.   
 
5 Item 2.   
 
6 Item 2.   
 
7 Item 2.   
 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The record evidence established two disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant receives credit 
for making payments on his child support arrearages in SOR ¶ 1.r and for the deferment 
of his student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n.  He claimed he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e 
and would make payments on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, but provided no proof of 
those payments. He indicated that he disputed a number of the debts, but failed to 
provide documentation showing he had a legitimate basis for disputing them. AG ¶ 
20(d) partially applies. AG¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant moved to his parents’ home to assist his ill stepfather. His stepfather’s 
illness was a condition beyond his control. However, he was later fired from a job for 
excessive internet usage and was thereafter unemployed for at least six months. Based 
on the evidence presented, I am unable to find that his financial problems were caused 
by conditions beyond his control or that he acted responsibly under the circumstances 
in addressing his delinquent debts. Insufficient evidence was presented to conclude his 
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and are unlikely to recur. No 
evidence was presented that he received financial counseling. His financial problems 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) do not apply 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.8 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the trustworthiness concerns at issue. Applicant failed to 
meet his burden of persuasion. His financial problems leave me with doubts as to his 
current eligibility to occupy a position of trust. Doubts about granting an applicant 
eligibility for a position of trust must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.m – 1.n:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.o – 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.r:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position. Eligibility to access sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
