 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02870 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cory Goldensoph, Esq. 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana twice in 2012, while holding a security clearance. He 
disclosed the illegal drug use in his security clearance application. He provided 
evidence that he no longer uses marijuana or associates with people using illegal drugs. 
His employer is aware of the 2012 incidents, and continues to support Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance. He mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 22, 2009, Applicant submitted a Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). (Item 6.) On September 15, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The 
SOR detailed reasons why the DoD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be denied, granted, continued, or revoked.  
 
On September 21, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
(Answer). On December 2, 2014, Applicant’s attorney filed his appearance. (Item 4.) On 
December 9, 2014, Applicant through his attorney requested that his case be decided 
on the written record rather than a hearing. (Item 5.) On May 14, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing eight Items, and 
mailed Applicant a complete copy of it on June 1, 2015. He received the copy on June 
4, 2015, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant timely filed a Response to the FORM, and submitted eight 
documents, which I marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 8 and admitted into the 
record without objection from Department Counsel.1  On July 23, 2015, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR. His admission is accepted as 
a factual finding.   
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He attended college 
from 2004 to 2008, and graduated with a bachelor’s degree. He is married since 2014. 
He and his wife were expecting their first child in July 2015. (Item 8; Response.) 
 
In January 2009 Applicant began a position with his current employer, at the age 
of 22. When Applicant completed his January 2009 e-QIP, he disclosed that between 
February 2004 and June 2004, he used marijuana six to eight times while in his senior 
year of high school.2 (Item 6.) He was subsequently granted a security clearance. (Item 
7.) 
 
When Applicant completed his February 2014 e-QIP, he disclosed that he used 
marijuana twice in March 2012. (Item 6.) He explained that while traveling for a vacation 
to another state he spent the night with a friend of a friend. That evening the friend 
offered Applicant marijuana which he accepted. On his way home from his vacation, 
Applicant spent another night with that friend, and again used marijuana when the friend 
offered it to him. He stated that he told his family and employer about his usage. He 
expressed regret and shame over his misconduct. (Item 2.)  
 
Applicant stated that he has not used marijuana since March 2012. He has had 
no contact with the individuals with whom he used marijuana, as they live in another 
state. He has matured since March 2012. He is now in management at his place of 
                                            
1 Applicant’s Counsel labeled his exhibits as Items in his Response to the FORM. For purposes, of 
clarification, those Items will be referred to as Applicant Exhibits (AE) in this Decision.  
2 The SOR did not allege Applicant’s 2009 marijuana use as a security concern. Hence, it will not be 
considered in the analysis of disqualifying conditions. However, it may be considered in the analysis of 
mitigating conditions and whole-person concept.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
employment and has become a leader of his team. His family and job are of primary 
importance to him. (Item 2.) He submitted a statement of his intent to agree to an 
automatic revocation of his security clearance for any future violations. (AE 5.) Applicant 
has never been arrested, charged, or convicted of a drug-related offense or any other 
offense. (Item 2.) 
 
Applicant submitted three letters of recommendation. A senior manager, who has 
supervised Applicant for five and a half years, is aware of the pending security 
clearance investigation. He stated that Applicant is an exemplary employee, excelling at 
a “high level of technical competence, leadership, teamwork, and responsibility.” (AE 2.) 
He said that Applicant “is genuinely remorseful and wishes he could change history. 
[Applicant] is guilty of a lapse of judgment-something that he has clearly learned from 
and I believe won’t repeat again.” (AE 2.) Another supervisor is aware of Applicant’s 
marijuana use. He said that Applicant explained to him what happened in March 2012, 
and that “[Applicant] did not take the easy way, he told the truth and took ownership of 
his actions.” (AE 3.) A colleague for six years is aware of Applicant’s marijuana use. He 
believes that “the very admission of the marijuana usage is testament to the open and 
honest, trustworthiness that defines [Applicant] as an individual.” (AE 4.) Applicant’s 
security officer stated that Applicant “has not been written up for any security violations 
or infractions.” (AE 6.) 
 
Applicant submitted four annual performance evaluations. In 2011 he received an 
overall “High Contributor” rating. In 2012 he received an overall “Exceptional Performer” 
rating. In 2013 he received an overall “High Performer” rating. In 2014 he earned an 
overall rating of “Exceptional Performer.” All evaluations document his success as an 
employee who demonstrates high potential and commitment to his job and team. (AE 
7.) 
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995) § 3. Thus, nothing 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Those two disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant admitted that he 
illegally used marijuana twice in March 2012, at which time he held a security 
clearance.3     
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004.) In 2009 Applicant disclosed to the Government that he illegally used marijuana 
several times in 2008 during the final months of his senior year in high school. In 2014 
Applicant disclosed that he illegally used marijuana twice in March 2012 when he was 
on vacation in another state. He has not used marijuana since March 2012, over three 
                                            
3AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
years ago. Based on his honest disclosures, remorse, the circumstances surrounding 
those usages, and his employer’s observations and recommendations, similar conduct 
is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) provides mitigation.  
 
Applicant no longer associates with people with whom he used illegal drugs and 
he avoids environments where drugs are present. He provided a signed statement of 
his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) also has application. 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. The marijuana he used 
was never lawfully prescribed for him under federal law. He did not provide proof of 
satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including rehabilitation 
and aftercare requirements, or a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The factors in favor of granting Applicant access to classified information are 
persuasive. Applicant honestly disclosed using marijuana in 2004 while in high school, 
and eight years later in 2012 while on a vacation. While his use in 2012 raised an 
additional concern because he held a security clearance at the time, his statements of 
remorse and guilt over his misconduct, along with strong work performances and 
impressive recommendations from supervisors, lead me to believe that he has 
sufficiently matured in the past three and a half years, and he will no longer use 
marijuana. He should realize at this time that similar conduct in the future, in all 
probability, will result in the loss of his security clearance and employment. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without concerns as to Applicant’s present eligibility and 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
