 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ADP Case No. 14-04814 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges he maintains his Canadian 
citizenship to protect his financial interests in Canada. Applicant’s Canadian citizenship 
does not provide a financial benefit to him. Applicant lives in the United States, votes in 
U.S. elections, and intends to retire in the United States. He offered to renounce his 
Canadian citizenship. Foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 4, 2013, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (GE 1) On March 28, 2015, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and 
modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, 
as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective 
on September 1, 2006. 
  
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline C (foreign influence). 
(HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. (HE 2) The DOD CAF 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such access to 
sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2)  
 
On April 16, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing. (HE 3) On July 1, 2015, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On 
July 28, 2015, DOHA assigned the case to me. On August 6, 2015, DOHA issued a 
notice of the hearing, setting the hearing for August 25, 2015. (HE 1) The hearing was 
held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered four exhibits into evidence, and 
Applicant offered one exhibit into evidence. (Tr. 15-16; 46-47; GE 1-4; AE A) All exhibits 
were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 16, 47; GE 1-4; AE A) I received the 
transcript of the hearing on August 31, 2015.     
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation and provided 
mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 69-year-old computer-technical consultant, who has been working 
with medical records for the same U.S. Government contractor for almost 20 years.2 (Tr. 
5, 7-8, 17; AE 1) He was born in Canada, and he attended school through college in 
Canada. (Tr. 17) He has never served in the U.S. or Canadian militaries. (Tr. 5-6) In 
1975, he married, and in 1985, he divorced. (Tr. 6) In 1986, he married his spouse. His 
oldest daughter is 25, and his twins are 15. (Tr. 8-9) In 1965, he graduated from high 
school. (Tr. 7) In 1970, he received a bachelor of arts in mathematics and economics, 
and in 1971, he received a bachelor of education. There is no evidence of reportable 
criminal offenses, alcohol or drug abuse, or violations of Applicant’s employment rules.  
 
Connections to Canada 
  
 Applicant lived in Canada from 1946 to 1989. In 2004, his spouse and children 
returned to Canada from the United States and have lived in Canada since 2004. (Tr. 
18, 21) Applicant visits them three days a week, and the other four days he stays in the 
United States. (Tr. 25) Applicant’s children receive the same Canadian education and 
medical benefits as other Canadian citizens and residents. (Tr. 35-37)  
 
Applicant has an expectation that he will receive monthly payments of about 
$500 from the Canadian Pension Plan, which is similar to Social Security.3 (HE 3) He 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s October 4, 2013 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (GE 1) 
 
3See Government of Canada website, “Lived or Living Outside Canada - Pensions and 
Benefits,”http://www.servicecanada.gc.ca/eng/services/pensions/international/index.shtml?utm source=v
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
has a Canadian Registered Retirement Savings Plan (RRSP), which is similar to a U.S. 
IRA plan. (HE 3)4 He ended his contributions to the RRSP when he left Canada in 1989. 
(Tr. 24) In 1989, his RRSP was valued at less than $100,000. (Tr. 27) The current value 
of his RRSP is about $400,000. He plans to move his RRSP funds to the United States; 
however, he is unsure whether there will be a penalty when the fund is transferred to 
the United States. (Tr. 24, 27-29) He will have to pay Canadian taxes on the funds when 
they are withdrawn from the RRSP account. (Tr. 29-31) See note 4, supra. 
 
In 1989, Applicant purchased farm land in Canada. (Tr. 20-21) In 2006, Applicant 
and his spouse built a home on the farm land. (Tr. 21) The farmland and home in 
Canada are valued at about $900,000. (Tr. 23; HE 3)  
 
Connections to the United States 
 
In 1989, Applicant entered the United States, and he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1999. (Tr. 17-18) Applicant’s spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and their 
children were born in the United States and U.S. citizens. (Tr. 32, 35; GE 1)   
 
Applicant prefers the United States over any other country. (Tr. 22) He votes in 
U.S. elections, and he has not voted in a Canadian election since 1999. (Tr. 35) He has 
not received Canadian medical benefits after 1999, and he has not held a Canadian 
passport after 1999. (Tr. 37, 39) He is eligible for U.S. Medicare, which he believes is an 
excellent medical benefit and probably better than Canadian medical care. (Tr. 45-46) 
His U.S. Social Security benefit is greater than his Canadian Pension Plan benefit. (Tr. 
45-46) He is not aware of any benefit he is receiving or will receive from Canada based 
on his Canadian citizenship. (Tr. 37-39) His pay is deposited into a U.S. bank account. 
(Tr. 33-34)  
 
Applicant is an honest and trustworthy person, who has had access to sensitive 
U.S. corporate financial information for many years. (Tr. 41-42) He loves the United 
States and plans to purchase property in the United States and to retire in the United 
States. (Tr. 22, 45-46) He does not currently own any property in the United States. (Tr. 
23) If necessary to retain his public trust position, he was willing to renounce his 
Canadian citizenship. (Tr. 40) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s manager has worked with Applicant since 1998. (AE A) He states that 
Applicant “is a conscientious, honest, and loyal employee, and a hard worker.” (AE A) 
                                                                                                                                            
anity+URL&utm medium=print+publication,+ISPB-147,+ISPB-341&utm term=/international&utmcontent 
=Mar+2013,+eng&utm campaign=CPP+retirement+planning,+OAS+Pension+2013,+Benefits+for+Low+I
ncome+Seniors. 
  
4See Government of Canada website, “Canada Revenue Agency” Registered Retirement 
Savings Plan (RRSP), http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/tx/ndvdls/tpcs/rrsp-reer/rrsps-eng.html.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant provides high-quality work, and he is honest and has integrity. (AE A) He 
enthusiastically supports approval of Applicant for a public trust position. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference trustworthiness concern stating, “when 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes one condition with seven subparts that could raise a 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 10(a) 
provides: 
 
 (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship 
of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests 
in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
The scope of AG ¶ 10 is not limited to the specifically enumerated disqualifying 
conditions and includes coverage by the Canadian health plan, even though he may not 
have received benefits from the plan; participation in the Canadian equivalent of the 
U.S. Social Security and Medicare plans; voting in Canadian elections, receipt of 
Canadian education benefits, and payment of Canadian income taxes. AG ¶ 10(a) 
applies. 
 
Department Counsel correctly noted that foreign preference concerns can arise 
and be disqualifying even in cases involving close allies of the United States. See ISCR 
Case No. 12-04023 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2015) (holding “Applicant’s extensive 
contacts within Canada, along with his dual citizenship and exercise of various 
prerogatives of Canadian citizenship,”5 warranted denial of his security clearance); 
ISCR Case No. 08-05869 at 5-7 (App. Bd. July 24, 2009) (reversing the grant of a 
security clearance and stating a U.S. citizen’s decision to move to Australia and serve in 
the Australian army showed “strong evidence of a profound, deeply personal 
commitment to the interests and welfare of that country.”).   
 
Applicant’s spouse and children are residents and citizens of Canada, and they 
have received medical and education benefits from Canada. Applicant has indirectly 
benefited from their Canadian citizenship and residency because when Canada 
provides benefits to them, Applicant does not have to pay for those benefits. 
Consideration of the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns in 
this case:  
  
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  
                                            
5The applicant in ISCR Case No. 12-04023 elected to live in Canada, and that “[a]pplicant’s 
health insurance is provided by a Canadian province; he participates in a Canadian pension plan and 
social insurance plan; he pays Canadian taxes, votes in Canadian elections, and has a Canadian driver’s 
license. He and his partner plan to live in Canada at least another five years.” Id. at 2. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government.  
 
AG ¶ 11(c) applies in part. Applicant voted in Canadian elections and received 
Canadian medical and education benefits before he moved to the United States and 
became a U.S. citizen in 1999. Applicant has not personally received benefits from 
Canada based on his Canadian citizenship since he became a U.S. citizen. The SOR 
does not cite receipt of Canadian benefits or voting in Canadian elections or residing in 
Canada as raising a trustworthiness concern. 
 
AG ¶ 11(b) applies. There is no evidence that Applicant has received any benefit 
based on his Canadian citizenship in relation to his expectation that he will receive 
monthly payments of about $500 from the Canadian Pension Plan, his ownership of a 
Canadian RRSP account, and his interest in family-owned Canadian farmland. 
Applicant was unaware of any benefit that he will receive in the future based on his 
Canadian citizenship.       
 
Applicant offered to renounce his Canadian citizenship. He stated he has a 
strong preference for the United States over Canada; his primary residence has been in 
the United States since 1989; and he plans to retire in the United States.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
under Guideline C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 69-year-old computer-technical consultant, who has been working 
with medical records for the same U.S. Government contractor for almost 20 years. He 
was born in Canada, and he attended school through college in Canada. He has never 
served in the U.S. or Canadian militaries. His spouse and three children are dual 
citizens of the United States and Canada, and they have lived in Canada since 2004. In 
1970, he received a bachelor of arts in mathematics and economics, and in 1971, he 
received a bachelor of education. There is no evidence of reportable criminal offenses, 
alcohol or drug abuse, or violations of Applicant’s employment rules. He is sufficiently 
mature to understand and comply with his public trust responsibilities. There is every 
indication that he is loyal to the United States, the DOD, and his employer.   
 
Applicant has not personally received benefits from Canada based on his 
Canadian citizenship since he became a U.S. citizen, and he does not know of any 
benefit that he will receive in the future based on his Canadian citizenship. Applicant is 
an honest and trustworthy person, who has had access to sensitive U.S. corporate 
financial information for many years. Applicant’s manager has worked with Applicant for 
17 years and describes Applicant as conscientious, honest, loyal, diligent, and he 
enthusiastically supports approval of Applicant for a public trust position. There is no 
evidence that Applicant has ever violated the trust of his employer. He loves the United 
States and plans to purchase property in the United States and to retire in the United 
States. If necessary to retain his public trust position, he was willing to renounce his 
Canadian citizenship.  
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign preference 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
