 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05963 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). Based on a review of Applicant’s SCA and the ensuing investigation, 
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) on December 16, 2014, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline.  
 
On January 30, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 20, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 7. On June 18, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply 
additional information. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on September 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 14 delinquent debts totaling $29,328 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.n). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.h and 1.k through 1.n. He indicated that he was unaware of the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.i and 1.j, which is interpreted as a denial of those debts. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. A credit report in the FORM contains substantial 
evidence of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j and indicated those debts arose from 
returned checks.1 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee who has been working for a federal 
contractor since July 2013. He graduated from high school in 1999. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from June 2003 to April 2013 and received an honorable 
discharge. He was unemployed from April 2013 to July 2013. He has been married 
twice. His first marriage began in April 2005 and ended in divorce in January 2006. He 
married his current wife in November 2007. He listed no children in his SCA. In June 
2008, he applied for a security clearance and was issued an SOR setting forth security 
concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines. His 
security clearance application was denied when he failed to respond to a request from 
the Department of the Navy Central Adjudications Facility.2 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports reflected that some of the alleged debts had dates of 
last activity going back as far as 2008. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated 
that he was making $100 payments every two weeks on a $2,699 vehicle loan in SOR ¶ 
1.c. A credit report dated May 20, 2015, supports his claim that he is making payments 
on that debt because its balance has been reduced to $1,489. In his Answer to the 
SOR, he also indicated that he was unable to make payment arrangements for the other 
admitted debts, but would make such arrangements when the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was 
paid.3  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that he received financial counseling. He did not 
provide a monthly budget. It is unknown whether he has any discretionary income 
remaining each month after payment of his expenses.  
 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 5. 
 
2 Items 2-4.  
 
3 Items 2, 5-7.   
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
4 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent debts 
are ongoing. Although he is making payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, he failed to 
show that he has acted responsibly under the circumstance in addressing his other 
delinquent debts. Insufficient evidence was presented to conclude his financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and are unlikely to recur. No evidence 
was presented that he received financial counseling. He provided no documentation 
showing he has a legitimate basis for disputing any debts. His financial problems 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.4 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. His financial problems raise doubts as to his current eligibility to 
access classified information. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly consistent 
with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance must be resolved in favor of national security.  
 
 
                                                          
4 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
