Item 2.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03469
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant owes more than $29,000 in unresolved delinquent debts that she
incurred over the past ten years. She offered no evidence of either ability or willingness,
under her current financial circumstances, to resolve these obligations. Resulting
security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on March 17, 2014.1
On November 10, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  The action was taken under2
Item 1. 3
Department Counsel submitted four Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 3 is a part of the Office4
of Personnel Management (OPM) Report of Investigation. It is a summary of Applicant’s unsworn interview
with an OPM investigator on April 15, 2014. It is not admissible in evidence since it was neither adopted by
Applicant nor authenticated by a witness. Its contents will not be considered. (Directive ¶ E3.1.20.)
Item 2.5
She formally admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.k, and 1.l. 6
Item 1.7
2
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted her written response to the SOR on December 13, 2014, and
requested that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on3
April 30, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was provided4
to Applicant on April 30, 2015, and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt
of the FORM. Applicant signed for receipt of the FORM on May 6, 2015, and timely
submitted additional material in response to the FORM, to which Department Counsel
had no objection. This response to the FORM, with three enclosures, is admitted as
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. I received the case assignment on June 18, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 32 years old, and has worked full time as an administrative or
accounting assistant since January 2010. She began her current position with a defense
contractor in February 2014. She never married, and has twin sons born in February
2005. She has no former military service or Federal Government employment, and has
never held a security clearance. She was unemployed from July 2004 to August 2007
because she “stopped working to have twin boys.” She attended a major university full
and part time from August 2001 to June 2007, and a community college part time from
September 2008 to at least March 2014, without earning a degree from either
institution.  5
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of allegations
concerning seven of her delinquent debts,  and formally denied the remaining6
allegations with some explanations.  She also admitted owing several other alleged7
debts in her FORM response, as discussed below. Applicant’s admissions are
incorporated as findings of fact.
Item 1; Item 4; AE A.8
Item 1; Item 4; AE A.9
Item 1; AE A.10
Item 1; Item 2 at 33; Item 4; AE A.11
Item 1; Item 4.12
3
Applicant incurred substantial debt to the major university she attended despite
numerous grants and student-employment opportunities. In 2009, the university turned
her account over to a collection agency with a balance in excess of $17,000. That
agency sued, and obtained a judgment for $9,486  against her on this debt in November
2012. In her answer to the SOR, she correctly explained that the debts alleged in SOR
¶¶ 1.a, 1.m, and 1.n were all based on different reports to credit agencies by the
collection agency concerning this same debt. She acknowledged that she had not made
payment toward this judgment, and estimated that the debt had grown to about $14,000
with post-judgment interest. She further stated that payment arrangements had been
made, but provided no documentation to support that claim.8
The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.k refer to the same $578 telephone bill that
was placed for collection by the service provider in January 2014 after it became
delinquent in November 2012. The collection agency reported in March 2014 that the
outstanding balance was $288. It is unclear how the balance was reduced, since
Applicant said in her SOR response that she would start paying on this bill in February
2015. Her response to the FORM provided no additional details concerning this debt.9
Applicant admitted owing the consumer and medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶
1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.l, which total $7,848. She said in her SOR response that she
would make payments toward these debts beginning in January or March 2015, but
provided no proof of any such payments in her June 2015 response to the FORM.10
Applicant originally denied the debts to a cable service provider that were alleged
in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.p, but later correctly identified them to be separate reports
concerning the same $417 debt made by the provider and the collection agency with
whom the provider placed the account for collection in December 2013. Applicant
denied this debt in her SOR response, and said in her FORM response that she was
unable to substantiate this debt. However, she reported it as an outstanding $414 debt
that she intended to resolve by June 2014 on her SF 86, and provided no subsequent
information to support a valid basis to dispute its validity.   11
Applicant claimed that the $414 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o was for cable service
to an address in another state where she never lived, and felt it was a matter of identity
theft. Whether this was an erroneous entry on her credit report or just another listing of
the cable service debt discussed above, I find that it is not a valid separate debt
supporting any additional security concerns.  12
Item 1; Item 4. AE A.13
Item 1; Item 4; AE A.14
Item 1.15
4
Applicant denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j in her SOR
response, stating that she was unable to contact the companies involved to find out if
they were her debts. In her FORM response, she said that the first and third of them
were medical debts arising from emergency room visits for her sons, but offered no
evidence of any effort to resolve them. These debts total $689 according to Item 4.13
Applicant also denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s, stating that
representatives of the creditors informed her that she was no longer indebted to them.
She provided no evidence to substantiate these claims, or to otherwise prove a valid
basis to dispute them. Each of these debts is reflected on her April 2014 credit report.  14
Applicant denied that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t resulted from an eviction,
claiming that she left the rental apartment voluntarily after being served a notice to
vacate. She admitted owing the back rent of $5,775, as alleged in the SOR.15
Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling, or of family budget
information that would indicate that she can resolve existing debts or avoid additional
financial delinquencies. The record lacks evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s
professional performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures.
No character witnesses provided statements describing her judgment, trustworthiness,
integrity, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in
person since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
6
Applicant owes more than $29,000 in unresolved delinquent debts that she
incurred over the past ten years. She offered no evidence of either ability or willingness,
under her current financial circumstances, to resolve these obligations. Her ongoing
pattern and history of inability or unwillingness to pay lawful debts raise security
concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate,
or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant has incurred substantial delinquent debts, which continue to date. She
offered insufficient evidence from which to establish a track record of debt resolution.
She failed to demonstrate that conditions beyond her control contributed to her financial
problems, or that she acted responsibly under such circumstances. MC 20(e) requires
documented proof to substantiate the basis of a dispute concerning a delinquent debt,
and Applicant admitted owing the vast majority of the debts alleged in the SOR.
Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish mitigation under these provisions.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
7
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
and experienced adult, who is responsible for the voluntary choices and conduct that
underlie the security concerns expressed in the SOR. Her delinquent debts arose over
the past ten years and remain largely unresolved, despite her recent years of full-time
employment. She provided no current budget information demonstrating an ability to
resolve these debts or avoid additional financial duress. She offered insufficient
evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, better judgment, or responsible conduct
in other areas of her life to offset resulting security concerns. The potential for pressure,
coercion, and duress from her financial situation remains undiminished. Overall, the
record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance. She did not meet her burden to mitigate the security
concerns arising from her financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c through 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.n through 1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.q through 1.t: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
