 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-04856   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 30, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies, excessive alcohol 
consumption, and criminal misconduct. Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 20, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On February 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), J (Criminal Conduct), and G (Alcohol). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on March 4, 2015 and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 6, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 
8, 2015, scheduling the hearing for August 7, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 17, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He served on active duty in the Army from 1994 to 
1997, and on active duty in the Navy from 1999 to 2007. He achieved the rank of petty 
officer first class. He is in the process of divorcing his wife and has custody of the one 
minor child from that marriage. He has five other minor children from other relationships. 
He is currently employed by a government contactor. (Tr. 24-25.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant is delinquent on 59 debts in the total amount of 
$103,995, including 3 student loans, 35 medical debts, 17 consumer debts, and unpaid 
taxes owed to his state and the Federal government. His debts are identified in the 
credit reports entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 3; 
GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant admitted he was indebted to the Federal and state governments for 
delinquent income taxes. Applicant was alleged to have two tax liens against him in the 
amounts of $1,448 and $4,704 for unpaid 2011 state taxes, as listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. Applicant’s August 2015 credit report reflects these are valid current liens. He was 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ggg to have failed to file his state income tax returns for tax years 
2005 through 2012, which led to a debt of $5,520 owed for state taxes. Further, in SOR 
¶ 1.fff, he allegedly failed to file his Federal income tax returns in 2008 through 2012 
which led to a Federal income tax debt totaling approximately $26,000.  
 
 Applicant testified that he filed his Federal and state income tax returns for 2007 
through 2014. He provided documentation from the IRS that shows he filed his 2008 
and 2009 Federal income tax returns late, in July 2012. His 2010 Federal income tax 
return was filed in a timely manner, in February 2011. His 2011 and 2012 Federal 
income tax returns were filed late, in December 2013. He claimed that the state 
garnished his pay and state income tax refunds to resolve his state tax obligations. He 
presented documentation that shows he resolved the state tax debts for 2005 through 
2008, 2010, and 2012. He still owes $1,568.76 for his 2009 state taxes. He provided no 
documentation on the status of his state tax debt from 2011. He testified that he 
negotiated a payment agreement with the Internal Revenue Service to make monthly 
payments on his 2009 Federal tax debt, but that he has not made any payments under 
 
 
3 
 
 
the agreement. He failed to file and pay his Federal and state income tax obligations 
because it “wasn’t a priority to [him] at the time.” (AE C; Tr. 40-44.) 
 
 Applicant’s denied SOR allegation SOR ¶ 1.nn because he did not recognize the 
creditor. However, he has not formally contested this debt. (Answer; Tr. 56.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e pertain to delinquent student loans. Applicant entered 
into a student loan rehabilitation program in February 2015 to rehabilitate these debts 
through monthly payments of $5 to this creditor. He failed to present documentation that 
he is making monthly payments as agreed upon under the written rehabilitation 
agreement. (AE A; Tr. 53-55.)  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.l through 1.o, 1.r, 1.s, 1.v through 1.cc, 1.ff through 1.kk, 1.oo through 
1.qq, 1.ss, 1.tt, and 1.vv through 1.eee, are delinquent medical bills. Applicant sought 
emergency medical treatment at a local hospital, because he was not near a Veteran’s 
hospital at the time of his illness. He had no medical insurance to cover his 
hospitalization. The Veteran’s Administration did not cover his hospitalization either. 
Applicant has not repaid any of these debts. (Answer; AE B; Tr. 47-51.) 
 
 Applicant has not paid any of the consumer debts identified in SOR ¶¶1.f through 
1.k, 1.p, 1.q, 1.t, 1.u, 1.dd, 1.ee, 1.ll, 1.mm, 1.rr, and 1.uu. He testified he lives pay 
check to pay check and does not have excess money to pay these debts. (Tr. 51.) 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history extends from 2000 to 2010. Applicant was arrested 
for Driving Under the Influence (DUI) in 2000, 2001, 2005, 2007, 2009, and twice in 
2010. He admitted all seven DUIs in his Answer, but testified that he only had one DUI 
in 2010. With respect to his most recent DUI conviction, he pled no contest to driving 
with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of greater than .08% on March 3, 2011. At the time 
of arrest in 2010, his BAC was .22%. He was ordered to complete an alcohol program, 
and sentenced to 120 days in jail. He was placed on probation for 5 years. His criminal 
history also includes arrests and convictions for criminal damage to private property and 
criminal trespass in June 2000; charges of fugitive from justice in September 2001; a 
dismissed charge of contempt of court in September 2001; a dismissed charge of 
inflicting corporal injury spouse/cohabitant in July 2004; driving without interlock device 
and driving on a suspended license in November 2007; and driving without interlock 
device and driving on a suspended license in October 2008. He denied the 2001 
contempt of court charge, although it is documented in his FBI record. (GE 1; GE 2; AE 
D; AE E; Tr. 27-40.) 
 
 Applicant was ordered to attend alcohol counseling in 2002, 2005, 2007, and 
2010. He admitted that he was administratively separated from the Navy with an 
honorable discharge due to his alcohol related incidents. He testified that he stopped 
drinking alcohol after his 2010 DUI. He does not attend Alcoholics Anonymous or other 
ongoing treatment. (Answer; Tr. 27-40.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant provided three letters describing his good judgment, trustworthiness, 
integrity, and reliability from military members he served with in the Navy. He testified 
that he has always handled proprietary information correctly and would never give 
protected information to anyone improperly. (AE F; Tr. 20.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by 59 debts in the 
total amount of $103,995. He has failed to satisfy even the smallest of these debts, 
ranging between $16 to $40, voluntarily. Only his state tax debts, for tax years 2005 
through 2008, 2010, and 2012, were resolved through involuntary garnishment of 
wages and tax returns. The evidence raises both of the above security concerns, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He provided no documentation to 
establish that he has voluntarily made payments on any of the 59 delinquent debts 
alleged. His financial situation is unlikely to be resolved in the near future and casts 
doubts on his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant blamed the 35 unpaid medical debts on his emergency hospitalization, 
an event beyond his control. He accepted responsibility for his failure to file and pay his 
Federal and state income tax obligations. Further, he failed to act responsibly to 
address the any of his debts in a timely manner. Only his state tax debts from 2005 
through 2008, 2010, and 2012, have been resolved. The rest of his debts remain 
unaddressed. AG ¶ 20(b) has not been fully established. 
 
 Applicant failed to produce documentation to show that he received counseling 
for his financial problems. There are no clear indications that his financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) have not been established. 
 
 Applicant testified that he denied one of the debts because he did not recognize 
the account. However, he failed to take any formal steps or otherwise document his 
dispute on that account. AG ¶ 20(e) has not been established. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and  
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
Applicant has a history of multiple criminal arrests and convictions that occurred 
from 2000 to 2010, including seven DUI convictions. These offenses give rise to 
concerns about Applicant’s judgment and reliability, both because of the nature and 
number of criminal offenses. Further, he produced no documentation to show he has 
been released from probation. The aforementioned disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
  
 Applicant’s criminal past continues to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and 
judgment. His numerous offenses spanned a decade, are recent, and he failed to 
present evidence to show that similar criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 32(a) 
does not provide full mitigation. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that he was pressured into criminal 
acts. He admitted each of the allegations. Neither AG ¶¶ 32(b) nor 32(c) provides 
mitigation. 
 
 Applicant failed to introduce evidence of rehabilitation. While he expressed 
remorse for his past and testified that he currently abstains from alcohol use, he 
presented nothing to show job training or higher education, a good employment record, 
or constructive community involvement. Given his record of alcohol violations, not 
enough time has passed to establish successful rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(d) does not 
provide full mitigation. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions raised by the evidence are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.     
  
 Applicant was convicted of seven DUI offenses from 2000 to 2010, after he 
consumed alcohol to the point of having impaired judgment. These incidents raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c).   
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
 
 
9 
 
 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents occurred over a ten-year period. While he is 
currently abstaining from alcohol use, he is still on probation for his last DUI. Other than 
completing the court-ordered alcohol counseling classes, he produced little evidence of 
rehabilitation that would show future misconduct is unlikely to occur. No prognosis was 
offered into evidence. Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the alcohol-related 
concerns. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, J, and G in my whole-person analysis. Applicant served honorably 
in the Army and Navy. However, his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct brought 
his military service to an end and led to his discharge. Despite numerous DUIs, 
Applicant continued to drive a motor vehicle after consuming alcohol in excess. He 
failed to present enough evidence of rehabilitation to overcome a heavy burden to 
mitigate his alcohol use and criminal conduct. Further, he has a significant number of 
unresolved financial delinquencies. Overall, the record evidence raises serious doubts 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative 
guidelines. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.ggg:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
