 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05380 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana and paid prostitutes for sex while holding a security 
clearance; he used marijuana and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) while on active duty 
in the Army; and he engaged in sexual activity with a 15-year-old child when he was in 
the Army. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(GE 1) On April 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant 
to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). (HE 
2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On May 15, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (HE 3) On June 10, 2015, Department Counsel requested a hearing. 
(Tr. 15) On June 18, 2015, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On July 23, 
2015, Applicant’s case was assigned to me. On August 6, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing setting the hearing for August 
26, 2015. Department Counsel offered three exhibits into evidence, and Applicant did 
not offer any documents into evidence. (Tr. 13, 17, GE 1-3) There were no objections, 
and all exhibits were admitted into evidence. (Tr. 17; GE 1-3) On September 1, 2015, 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.e through 1.h. 
(HE 3) He denied the remaining SOR allegations, and he provided some extenuating 
and mitigating information.     
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old quality assurance specialist employed by a defense 
contractor for the previous 13 years. (Tr. 6-7, 18-19) In 1995, he graduated from high 
school. (Tr. 8; GE 1) He served on active duty in the Army from 1995 to 1999, and in the 
Army National Guard from 1999 to 2003. (Tr. 7, 19) He received an Army 
Commendation Medal (ARCOM). (Tr. 68) When he was discharged, he was a specialist 
(E-4), and he received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 8) His military occupational 
specialty (MOS) was light-wheel vehicle mechanic (63B). (Tr. 8) In 2014, he was 
awarded a degree in engineering technology. (Tr. 9) He has never been married, and 
his two children are seven and five. (Tr. 7) His domestic partner has a 10-year-old child. 
(Tr. 7) Applicant has held a security clearance since 2003. (Tr. 58) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege that from about 2000 to 2001, and from about 2007 to 
April 2011, Applicant falsified his timecards when he certified that he worked 40 hours in 
a one-week period. In April 2010, Applicant admitted that he arrived late for work, left 
early, and entered eight hours on his timecard. (GE 3 at 3) Applicant was paid by the 
hour, and he was supposed to enter the time he actually worked on a daily basis. (Tr. 
51) At his hearing, he explained if he arrived for work late, he worked late or he skipped 
lunch. (Tr. 51-53) He denied that he entered incorrect information on his timecards. (Tr. 
52-53) Sometimes he received compensatory time for working more than eight hours on 
a previous shift. (Tr. 53-54) He denied that he falsified his timecards. (Tr. 54)  
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that in about 2008, Applicant had non-consensual sexual 
intercourse with a woman (S), who was unconscious due to the prior consumption of 
alcohol. Applicant invited S to his apartment on several occasions, and he engaged in 
consensual sexual intercourse with S. (Tr. 35) On the occasion where S passed out 
during sexual intercourse, Applicant and S were both intoxicated. Applicant was 
engaging in sexual intercourse with S when she passed out. (Tr. 36-37, 63-64) 
Applicant continued to engage in sexual intercourse with S after she passed out. (Tr. 
37-38) He acknowledged that he should have stopped sexual intercourse when S 
passed out. (Tr. 38-39) Applicant said that he and S subsequently engaged in 
consensual sexual intercourse. (Tr. 38-39)2 His most recent contact with S was over the 
Internet in 2011. (Tr. 40, 61-62) Even though he maintained contact with S from 2008 to 
2011, he claimed he could not recall her name. (Tr. 61-62) Applicant’s domestic partner 
was unaware of his relationship with S. (Tr. 66) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant provided a false affidavit on July 22, 2013, 
when he stated the sexual intercourse described in the preceding paragraph was 
consensual. The affidavit described the same facts as in the preceding paragraph. He 
explained why he believed the sexual intercourse was consensual, and he 
acknowledged he continued to engage in sexual intercourse after S passed out.     
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that from about 2003 to about August 2009, on at least three 
occasions, Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Applicant 
began using marijuana in 1994, when he was a senior in high school. (Tr. 22) At his 
hearing, he said he used marijuana five or six times in high school, and a few times 
while in the Army, and once, while he worked for his current employer. (Tr. 23) He 
stopped using marijuana in August 2009. (Tr. 22) He said he used marijuana less than 
ten times in total. (Tr. 22) When he completed his November 2002 SF 86, he said he did 
not use illegal drugs in the previous seven years. (Tr. 25-26)  
 
In 2010, Applicant told an interviewer from another agency about his illegal drug 
use stating: from 1995 to March 2003, he used marijuana about twice a month; from 
April 2003 to summer of 2008, he used marijuana no more than ten times in total; and in 
1999, he used LSD or “acid” five times while he was in the Army. (Tr. 23, 28, 58; GE 3 
at 6) He was not caught on a urinalysis test or punished for using marijuana. (Tr. 24) He 
said he stopped using illegal drugs in 2009. (Tr. 29) In his February 13, 2013 SF 86, 
Applicant said he used marijuana once in the previous seven years, and that was in 
August 2009, while holding a security clearance. (GE 1) He said he used marijuana 
three times in the past ten years. (GE 1)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges that between 2009 and April 2010, Applicant drove an 
automobile while intoxicated by alcohol (DUI). Applicant admitted that he committed two 
or three DUIs from 2009 to April 2010. (Tr. 42-44; SOR response; GE 3) There is no 
evidence of arrests or convictions for DUI. 
 
                                            
2 In his July 22, 2013 sworn statement, Applicant said he did not have sexual contact with S after 
the occasion when they were both intoxicated, and she passed out. (GE 2 at 2-3)  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges that from about 1998 to about 2006, Applicant paid for sex 
with prostitutes on about five occasions while in the Army and while holding a security 
clearance. He admitted paying for prostitutes as alleged, and his most recent hiring of a 
prostitute was in 2006. (Tr. 29-35, 43; SOR response; GE 3 at 6-7) He engaged in sex 
with prostitutes while he was in the Army, and subsequently as a government 
contractor. Applicant’s domestic partner is unaware of Applicant’s involvement with 
prostitutes in 2006. (Tr. 40; GE 2; GE 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges that in about 2000 or 2001, while at a party, when he was on 
active duty in the Army, he allowed a 15-year-old child to masturbate him. (Tr. 44) 
Applicant was about 21 or 22 years old when this offense occurred. (Tr. 44) At the time, 
he knew she was underage; however, he did not know she was 15. (Tr. 44-49, 67) At 
first, he said he had sexual contact with her “just once.” (Tr. 45) After being confronted 
with an April 2010 summary of interview indicating they had a one-month relationship, 
and they engaged in sexual intercourse on one occasion and she masturbated him on 
another occasion, he admitted that he also engaged in sexual intercourse with her. (Tr. 
47-49, 60; GE 3 at 8-9) Later, he said he did not remember what happened in regard to 
sexual activity with her. (Tr. 49) He ended his relationship with her after her father, a 
police officer, talked to him. (Tr. 45) Her father advised Applicant that the child has 
mental and emotional problems. (Tr. 59) Applicant’s domestic partner is unaware that 
he engaged in sexual activity with a 15-year-old child. (Tr. 49)  
 
Applicant told his co-workers that his security clearance hearing was about drug 
use, and he did not disclose the other allegations in the SOR because it was 
embarrassing information. (Tr. 55-56) Applicant said he received good evaluations from 
his employer, and there were no allegations of security violations. (Tr. 69) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
  
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) apply. Applicant engaged in a sexual relationship 
with S; he used marijuana while in the Army and subsequently while holding a security 
clearance; he used LSD while in the Army; he drove an automobile while intoxicated on 
two or three occasions; he engaged in sexual activity with prostitutes; and he allowed a 
child to masturbate him while he was in the Army.  
 
Under military law, use of marijuana and LSD and sexual contact with a 15-year-
old child are serious crimes. Marijuana use while holding a security clearance is a 
significant rule violation. Paying for sex with a prostitute and DUI are criminal offenses. 
Criminal offenses are rule violations and show questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, and unreliability. AG ¶ 16(e)(1) applies because sexual activity with a 
child, sexual activity with prostitutes, and his relationship with S create a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Such conduct adversely affects Applicant’s 
professional standing as an employee of a DOD contractor. There is substantial 
evidence of these three disqualifying conditions, and further inquiry about the 
applicability of mitigating conditions is required.   
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d.  There is not enough evidence to 
establish that Applicant committed timecard fraud and that he lied about whether his 
sexual intercourse with S was consensual. AG ¶ 17(c) applies to Applicant’s DUIs in 
SOR ¶ 1.f because they are not recent. Applicant denied commission of any DUIs in the 
previous five years.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply to the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 
1.g, and 1.h. Applicant’s sexual involvement with a 15-year-old child is particularly 
serious. He used illegal drugs and paid a prostitute for sex while holding a security 
clearance. He engaged in criminal conduct and committed rule violations. Applicant did 
not disclose his sexual relationships with S, the 15-year-old child, and prostitutes to his 
domestic partner or his coworkers. He is vulnerable to exploitation or duress. Personal 
conduct concerns are not mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline E, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting continuation of Applicant’s clearance. 
Applicant is a 38-year-old quality assurance specialist employed by a defense 
contractor for the previous 13 years. He served on active duty in the Army from 1995 to 
1999, and in the Army National Guard from 1999 to 2003. He received an ARCOM. 
When he was discharged, he was a specialist, and he received an honorable discharge. 
In 2014, he was awarded an associate’s degree in engineering technology. Applicant 
has held a security clearance since 2003. Applicant had good evaluations from his 
employer. There are no allegations of security violations. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The weight of the evidence supports revocation of Applicant’s security clearance. 
When Applicant was in the Army, he used marijuana and LSD; he paid a prostitute for 
sex; and he engaged in sexual activity with a 15-year-old child. Under military law, use 
of marijuana and LSD and sexual contact with a 15-year-old child are serious crimes. 
While holding a security clearance, he used marijuana and paid for sex with a prostitute. 
He engaged in a sexual relationship with S. He did not want the mother of his children 
and domestic partner to know about his sexual relationships. His criminal conduct and 
sexual relationships create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Such 
conduct adversely affects Applicant’s professional standing as an employee of a DOD 
contractor.  
 
Applicant was not truthful when he completed his November 2002 SF 86, in his 
July 22, 2013 sworn statement, and at his hearing.3 Applicant falsely denied using 
illegal drugs for the previous seven years in his November 2002 SF 86 when in fact, he 
used marijuana and LSD while he was in the Army. Applicant falsely said he did not 
have sexual contact with S after the occasion when they were both intoxicated, and she 
passed out during sexual intercourse. Applicant falsely stated at his hearing that he did 
not remember the number or types of sexual contact he had with the 15-year-old child. 
He falsely stated at his hearing that he only used marijuana once while working for his 
current employer.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.   
 
                                            
3The SOR did not include the allegations in this paragraph. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an 
SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct in this paragraph under the whole-person 
concept and not for any other purpose. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
