 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05896 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 5, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. On July 2, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
it was received on July 23, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did object to any 
of the items offered and they are admitted into evidence. She submitted additional 
information. There was no objection and the information is admitted into evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on September 1, 2015.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request, as part of the FORM, that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts about Colombia. The request is attached to 
the record. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the request that are supported by source documents from official U.S. 
Government publications. I have also taken administrative notice of other facts from 
official U.S. Government websites. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, 
below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. She holds a bachelor’s degree. She has worked for the 
same federal employer since 1998. She married her husband, a citizen of Colombia, in 
a civil ceremony in the United States in 2007. They also had a religious ceremony in 
Colombia several months later. Her husband has two adult daughters, who were born 
and reside in the United States. Applicant’s oldest stepdaughter is married. Applicant 
and her husband have two children, who were born and reside with them in the United 
States. They are seven and five years old. Applicant’s husband has three grandchildren, 
who were born and reside in the United States. Applicant has held a top secret security 
clearance since 1999, without incident.1 
 
 Applicant’s spouse resides in the United States and holds a G-4 visa. This visa is 
a nonimmigrant visa for employees of international organizations and members of their 
immediate families. It permits the holder to engage in business activities and remain in 
the United States as long as the Secretary of State recognizes the G-4 status. 
Applicant’s spouse has been employed by a prominent international organization since 
1990. In the past, he held U.S. resident status derived from his previous marriage to a 
U.S. citizen. His children from that marriage were born in the United States and are 
citizens. In 2002, Applicant’s husband converted his U.S. resident status to a G-4 status 
because of its favorable financial benefits for his family. As the holder of a G-4 visa, 
upon retirement from the international organization, Applicant’s husband is eligible to 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
apply for U.S. permanent residency. Applicant indicated that, upon retirement, her 
husband intends to apply for U.S. citizenship based on his marriage to her.2  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Colombia. She has held a 
U.S. tourist visa. Applicant has contact with her annually or every other year. Two of 
Applicant’s sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of Colombia. Another sister-in-law is 
a citizen and resident of France. Three of her brothers-in-law are citizens and residents 
of Colombia. Another brother-in-law is a citizen of Colombia and resides in the United 
States. Applicant noted all of these in-laws have held U.S. tourist visas, and she has 
contact with them annually or every other year when she and her husband visit his 
mother. She also will greet them when her husband communicates with them via 
electronic means. There is no evidence that any of these relatives are employed by the 
Colombian government.3 
 
 Applicant has two aunts that are citizens and residents of Colombia. They are her 
mother’s sisters. Applicant’s aunts have held U.S. tourist visas and her contact with 
them consists of when she visits Colombia, or on a rare occasion when they may travel 
to the United States. Her other contact is an infrequent email or for special occasions. 
There is no evidence her aunts are employed by the Colombian government.  
 
 Applicant’s cousin is a citizen and resident of Colombia. Her cousin is employed 
by a department of the local government, similar to a state. Applicant visited her in 2010 
when their grandmother passed away. Applicant has limited contact with her on special 
occasions, such as birthdays.  
 
Applicant’s mother became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1972, 
after her marriage to Applicant’s father. Applicant’s father was a U.S. foreign services 
officer for 35 years and served as a deputy chief of mission and an interim ambassador 
during his tenure. Her mother worked as a contractor for a U.S. government agency for 
several years before becoming a permanent employee of the agency. She retired from 
the agency after 28 years of honorable service. Both of her parents held top secret 
security clearances while employed with the federal government. Her mother passed 
away in 2009. 
 
 At one time, Applicant and her brother owned land in Colombia that they 
inherited from their grandmother. The land was sold in 2013, and they no longer own it.  
 
 Applicant and her brother inherited a house in Colombia that was owned by their 
mother. It was purchased by her in 1993, with the purpose of providing a place for their 
grandmother to live until she passed away. Applicant’s mother predeceased their 
grandmother, and the house remained in her mother’s name, but her brother and she 
are the heirs. They have attempted to sell the house, but have had difficulties because it 
is not yet held in their names. It is their intention to sell it because neither Applicant nor 
                                                          
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
her brother ever plan to move to or live in Colombia. Their cousin has agreed to 
purchase the house, and they project the sale to be completed sometime in 2015. She 
estimated the valued of the property to be approximately $30,000. If it sells for that 
amount, her share would be $15,000. She stated in her response to the FORM that this 
amount is insignificant, especially compared to her annual salary which is almost five 
times that amount, presumably almost $75,000. She considered the property, which 
was inherited and not purchased, to be more of a burden at this point. 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she indicated her contact with her relatives 
in Colombia is infrequent. When her husband contacts his relatives via electronic 
communications, her participation is to say “hello.” She sees her husband’s relatives 
when they visit Colombia every year or two years for about a week of their three to four 
week stay. She last saw her mother’s relatives in Colombia in 2010 when her 
grandmother was ill. Applicant attributes the frequency of her visits to Colombia as due 
to the benefits the international organization provides, rather than a close relationship 
with their relatives. Her familial contacts in Colombia are unaware of what her 
employment is or that she holds a security clearance.4  
 
 Applicant indicated that she has strong financial ties to the United States. Along 
with her commitment to her job, she and her husband have a home valued at 
approximately $770,000. She stated she has never lived in Colombia and her brother, 
stepchildren, children, and step-grandchildren all are citizens and residents of the 
United States. Applicant explained she has always contacted her facilities security 
officer prior to foreign travel and submitted a debrief form after her travel was 
completed. She has always complied with the U.S. State Department’s travel warnings 
and other requirements. 5 
 
Colombia 
 
 The United States and Colombia have had diplomatic relations since 1822, 
following Colombia’s independence from Spain. It is a middle-income country and one 
of the oldest democracies in Latin America. It has experienced more than a half century 
of conflict with illegal armed groups involved in drug trafficking. There have been peace 
talks since 2012 between the government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed 
Forces of Colombia, its largest guerilla group. This group committed the majority of 
terrorist attacks in the Western Hemisphere in 2013. The United States has long-term 
interests in Colombia promoting security, stability, and prosperity, and supporting 
Colombia’s continued progress in addressing its security, economic development and 
governance challenges.  
 
Colombia’s National Consolidation Plan seeks to re-establish state control and 
legitimacy in strategically important areas previously dominated by illegal armed groups 
through a phased approach that combines counternarcotic, economic and social 
                                                          
4 Response to FORM. 
 
5 Response to FORM. 
 
5 
 
 
development initiatives. The U.S. policy supports the Colombian government’s efforts to 
strengthen its democratic institutions, promote respect for human rights and the rule of 
law, foster socio-economic development, address immediate humanitarian needs, and 
end the threats to democracy posed by narcotics trafficking and terrorism. The United 
States is Colombia’s largest trade partner and has numerous trade agreements.  
 
Colombia’s most serious human rights problems are an ineffective judiciary, 
forced displacement, corruption and societal discrimination. The availability of drug 
trafficking revenue often exacerbated corruption. Other problems include extrajudicial 
and unlawful killings; slow pace of investigations, trials, and indictments in cases related 
to extrajudicial killings; insubordinate military collaborations with members of illegal 
arms groups; forced disappearances; harassment of human rights groups and activists, 
including death threats; violence against women and girls; and trafficking in persons. 
The government continued efforts to prosecute and punish perpetrators, including 
members of security services who committed abuses. It has increased resources for the 
Attorney General’s Office, prioritizing human rights cases, and employed a new strategy 
to analyze human rights and other cases.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
6 http://www.state.gov/misc/list/index.htm 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
7 
 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(c), and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” 
The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a 
relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”7  
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”8 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the 
nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue.9  
 
Applicant’s husband is a citizen of Colombia. He resides in the United States and 
has a G-4 visa due to his employment with an international organization. He has been a 
permanent resident of the United States in the past and upon retirement intends to 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
8 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **16-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
9 See generally; ISCR Case. No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activities in area where family members 
resided. 
 
8 
 
 
apply for U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s husband’s mother and some of his siblings are 
citizens and residents of Colombia. Applicant also has two aunts and a cousin who are 
citizens and residents of Colombia. Applicant travels to Colombia every one to two 
years and visits these relatives. Colombia has numerous terrorist groups operating 
within its borders and has issues with human rights violations. This creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c) have 
been raised by the evidence.  
 
Applicant and her brother inherited from their mother property valued at 
approximately $30,000. They are attempting to sell the property and have no intention 
of moving or living in Colombia. If the property sold for its estimated value, Applicant 
would only be entitled to $15,000. Based on Applicant’s significant financial footprint in 
the United States, I find this property does not constitute a substantial financial interest, 
which could subject her to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. SOR ¶ 
1.f alleged she owned farm land in Colombia. She no longer owns this land. I find 
disqualifying conditions do not apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s husband is a Colombian citizen and has resided in the United States 
for approximately 24 years. Applicant has customary familial contact with her two aunts 
and a cousin in Colombia and visits them annually or every two years. She has limited 
other contact with them. She and her husband visit his relatives in Colombia about once 
a year or every two years. Applicant’s contact with her husband is more than casual or 
infrequent. Her contact with other family living in Colombia is not infrequent or casual. 
Therefore, I cannot conclude that it is unlikely that his familial relationships could create 
a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
 
9 
 
 
There is no evidence that Colombia actively engages in espionage against the 
United States or that it targets its citizens for exploitation to gain information. The nature 
of a nation’s government and its relationship with the United States are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. Except for Applicant’s cousin who is employed by the local 
government, it does not appear other family members are dependent upon the 
Colombian government. Applicant’s husband resides in the United States and works for 
an international organization and is not dependent on the Colombian government. The 
United States maintains close relations with Colombia. It is unlikely Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between her family and the interests of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies 
 
Both of Applicant’s parents were career federal employees holding top secret 
clearances. Applicant has held a top secret clearance without incident since 1999. Her 
children, stepchildren, and step-grandchildren are all citizens and residents of the 
United States. She and her husband have significant financial interests in the United 
States. At one time, her husband was a permanent resident of the United States, but 
due to financial benefits he maintains a G-4 visa status, and intends on remaining in the 
United States after he retires and applying for citizenship. Applicant has family in 
Colombia, but those she is most loyal to are her immediate family in the United States. I 
find there is no conflict of interest because of Applicant’s deep and longstanding loyalty 
to the United States and she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
10 
 
 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 44 years old. She has worked for the same federal contractor since 
1998 and held a top secret security clearance, without incident, since 1999. Applicant’s 
husband has worked in the United States for the past 24 years for an international 
organization. Due to exceptional benefits he receives, it is financially advantageous for 
him to maintain his Colombian citizenship until he retires, whereupon he will apply for 
U.S. citizenship. Although Applicant and her husband visit family in Colombia, her ties, 
commitments, and loyalties are firmly grounded in the United States. She provided 
sufficient information to meet her burden of persuasion to mitigate the foreign influence 
security concerns. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
