 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00880 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally purchased and used drugs between 2008 and 2012. Part of his 
illegal drug-related behavior occurred after he was hired in 2010 by a federal contractor. 
Moreover, he falsified both his 2011 and 2012 security clearance applications (SCA) to 
conceal his history of drug-related behavior. He failed to mitigate the drug involvement 
and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted SCAs on February 7, 2011, and September 7, 2012. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) and Guideline E (personal 
conduct) on April 30, 2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2014, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
March 20, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on March 23, 2015, scheduling a hearing for April 23, 2015. Applicant 
requested a delay, and on May 6, 2015, the hearing was rescheduled for May 22, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 - 5). GE 1 through 3 
were admitted without objection. GE 4 was admitted over Applicant’s objection. GE 5 
was marked and made part of the record, but was not considered as evidence. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant exhibit (AE) 1. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, ¶ 2.a (cross-alleging SOR ¶ 1 – Applicant admitted 1.a), 2.b through 2.d, 2.f, and 
2.h, with comments. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 2. a (cross-alleging 
SOR ¶ 1 - Applicant denied ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c), 2.e, and 2.g. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old physical security guard employed with a federal 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 2005, and received a bachelor’s degree in 
mass communications in 2010. Applicant has never been married. He has a four-year-
old daughter for whom he provides support. 
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer in November 2010, and submitted 
his first SCA in February 2011. In his response to Section 21 (Illegal Drugs), asking 
whether in the last year he had used any illegal substances, including marijuana, 
Applicant answered “no.” He deliberately failed to disclose that he used marijuana once 
between January and April 2010. Section 21 also asked whether in the last seven years 
he had been “involved in the illegal purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, 
transfer, shipping receiving, or sale of any . . . marijuana.” Applicant answered “no,” and 
he deliberately failed to disclose that he purchased marijuana three times between 2008 
and April 2010. He also failed to disclose that he facilitated marijuana transactions for 
his college roommate at least five to ten times. 
 
 Applicant disclosed in his February 2011 SCA that he was fired from his job with 
a hardware retailer because he was involved in an argument with a coworker. He also 
disclosed that he was fired by a clothing retailer because he attempted to steal 
merchandise. He was prosecuted for attempted larceny and received probation before 
judgment. 
 
In early 2012, while working for a federal contractor, Applicant applied for a 
position with a Government agency (Agency), and submitted a SCA in March 2012. On 
7 and 21 May 2012, Applicant participated in polygraph-assisted interviews with 
Agency’s investigators. During the May 7 interview, Applicant disclosed that he used 
marijuana twice – the first time in 2008, and the second time between January and April 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
2010. He stated that for the second occasion in 2010, he purchased marijuana from his 
roommate and shared the marijuana with a female friend. Applicant failed to disclose 
both instances of use and the purchase of marijuana in his February 2011 SCA and the 
Agency’s March 2012 SCA. 
 
At the start of his second Agency interview on May 21, 2012, Applicant reviewed 
the report of his May 7, 2012 interview, and indicated that it was complete and accurate, 
and he made no corrections. During his May 21st interview, Applicant disclosed that 
while in college, between the fall of 2008 and the spring of 2010, he resided with two 
friends who were friends with a drug dealer. One of Applicant’s roommates sold 
marijuana out of their apartment. While in the apartment, Applicant handled money in 
drug transactions approximately five to ten times. Individuals would come to the 
apartment door and hand him money for his roommate. Once or twice, his roommate 
gave him a bag with marijuana for Applicant to give to the person at the door. (GE 4) 
Applicant also disclosed that twice in March 2012, he purchased a $10 bag of marijuana 
from his roommate for a girl he was friends with. He purchased the marijuana because 
he liked the girl. He stated that he did not smoke any of the marijuana. 
 
When asked by the Agency interviewer why he did not disclose the above 
marijuana-related behavior in his March 2012 SCA (submitted to the Agency), or during 
his May 7th interview, Applicant stated the he was concerned about possible negative 
repercussions in the security clearance process. (GE 4)  
 
At his hearing, Applicant contradicted his two statements during the May 2012 
Agency interviews. He denied knowing that his roommates were selling marijuana from 
their apartment. He claimed that he suspected they were doing it, but denied “really” 
knowing about it until he was close to graduating. He averred he wanted to get away 
from his roommates and move out of the apartment, and would have changed 
apartments if he had the money to do so. He stated that he was about six months from 
graduating when he found about his roommates selling marijuana, and stayed in the 
apartment because he did not have the money to move. 
 
Applicant submitted another SCA in September 2012. (GE 1) In his response to 
Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity), asking whether in the last seven years 
he had used any illegal substances, including marijuana, Applicant answered “no.” He 
deliberately failed to disclose that he used marijuana three times between 2008 and 
April 2010. Section 23 also asked whether in the last seven year he had been “involved 
in the illegal purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping receiving, 
or sale of any . . . marijuana.” Applicant answered “no,” and he deliberately failed to 
disclose that he purchased marijuana twice in March 2012, and that he facilitated 
marijuana transactions for his roommate at least five to ten times between 2008 and 
2010. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant denied knowingly purchasing marijuana for his female 
friend. He claimed that twice he gave her $10 for food, and unbeknown to him, she used 
the money to purchase marijuana. He claimed he found out about her use of the money 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
to purchase marijuana after the second time it happened. Applicant testified that he no 
longer associates with her because of her use of marijuana. 
 
Section 25 (Investigations and Clearance Record) of the September 2012 SCA 
asked Applicant whether the Government had ever investigated his background. 
Applicant answered “no,” and deliberately failed to disclose that his background was 
investigated by the Agency in early 2012. When asked at the hearing why he failed to 
disclose the Agency’s background investigation, Applicant denied knowing that he was 
investigated by the Agency. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse and regret for his involvement with illegal drug 
users. He testified that he grew up and has lived around marijuana users since he was 
in high school, but that he has always avoided that environment whenever possible. He 
stated that he is not interested in using illegal drugs or being around people who use 
illegal drugs. He is currently dedicated to his daughter, work, and coaching soccer. He 
no longer associates with any illegal drug users. 
 
Applicant’s supervisor considers him to be a good employee and person. He 
displays a positive attitude, has a good work ethic, and shows up for work on time. 
Applicant is also respectful to his supervisor and co-workers. Applicant’ supervisor 
considers him to be a loyal citizen and employee. He favorably recommended 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana at least three times and facilitated marijuana 
transactions for his roommates five to ten times between 2008 and 2010. He purchased 
marijuana twice in March 2012. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug abuse;” 
and “(c) illegal drug possession.” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. Applicant disclosed his 
illegal drug-related behavior during an Agency’s interviews in May 2012. He also 
admitted part of his drug-related behavior in his responses to DOHA interrogatories, in 
his SOR response, and at his hearing.  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
None of the above drug-involvement mitigating conditions fully apply, and do not 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s most recent drug-related behavior occurred 
in 2012, as such it could be considered not recent. I also considered Applicant’s claims 
that he has disassociated from his drug-using associates, friends, and contacts; and 
that he has changed his lifestyle with respect to illegal drug use. He claimed that he is 
now dedicated to his daughter and his work.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to establish that his drug-related behavior is 
unlikely to recur, and his evidence is insufficient to establish his successful rehabilitation. 
At his hearing, Applicant contradicted his prior statements to an Agency’s investigators, 
and minimized the extent of his drug-related behavior. Applicant’s testimony lacks 
credibility when considered in light of the evidence as a whole. His lack of credibility cast 
doubts on his testimony about his rehabilitation, efforts to distance himself from illegal 
drug users, and permanent lifestyle changes to prevent any future illegal drug abuse.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant’s drug-related behavior, in conjunction with his numerous 
false statements (as discussed under the personal conduct guideline), demonstrate his 
inability or unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Serious doubts 
remain about his trustworthiness and judgment. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  The SOR alleges two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations. 
  
 Applicant deliberately failed to disclose in his 2011 and 2012 SCAs to the DOD 
his illegal drug-related behavior between 2008 and 2012, and that the Government 
investigated his background in 2011-2012. His falsifications were intentional and 
designed to conceal information from the Government so that he could obtain or retain a 
security clearance. Additionally, he was fired from his employment in 2007 and 2008 
because of misconduct. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (d) are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 describes seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
For the same reasons discussed above under Guideline H, incorporated herein, 
none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant engaged in illegal drug-related 
behavior between 2008 and 2012. Moreover, he was clearly made aware of the 
Government’s security concerns about his failure to disclose his drug-related behavior 
in his 2011 SCA, his March 2012 SCA (to the Agency), and during the Agency’s May 
2012 interviews. Notwithstanding, Applicant again failed to disclose his drug-related 
behavior in his September 2012 SCA submitted to the DOD. Additionally, he failed to 
disclose that the Agency had investigated his background in 2011-2012.  
 
Applicant’s omissions were deliberate and made with the intent to conceal 
relevant, material information from the Government. Moreover, during his hearing, 
Applicant minimized the extent of his drug-related behavior and contradicted his prior 
statements to an Agency’s investigators. Applicant’s testimony lacks credibility when 
considered in light of the evidence as a whole. His lack of credibility cast doubts on his 
testimony about his rehabilitation, efforts to distance himself from illegal drug users, and 
permanent lifestyle changes to prevent any future illegal drug abuse. His falsifications 
(which constitute felony offenses) raise unresolved questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Personal conduct concerns 
are not mitigated.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my 
whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 27, has been working for his employer since November 2010. He has 
a four-year-old daughter. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and 
all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
failed to mitigate the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement and personal 
conduct.  
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
