 The SOR incorrectly cited  the case number as ADP Case No. 14 05529. It has been corrected to ISCR Case No.1
14 05529. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-055291
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Lance R. Gallalrdo, Esquire
September 8, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On December 5, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
B and C for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant, through his attorney, replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on January
16, 2015, and he requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was
assigned to this Administrative Judge on March 2, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on March 10, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 5, 2015.
The Government offered Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received and admitted without
2
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through J,
which were also admitted without objection. One additional witness, Applicant’s father,
testified on behalf of Applicant. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on May
13, 2015. The record remained open to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence,
and two documents that were submitted in a timely fashion have been identified and
entered into evidence without objection as post-hearing Exhibits A and B. Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant and his witness,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
relating to the Republic of Korea (South Korea). The request and the attached
documents were admitted into evidence as Exhibit 2. The facts administratively noticed
are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant and the
second witness, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following
findings of fact: 
Applicant is 44 years old. He was born in South Korea in 1970, and he moved to
the United States in 1996, under a student visa. He became a United States citizen on
January 18, 2012. Applicant has been married to his present wife since 1999, and she
has never been employed outside of the home since they have been married. They
have two sons, ages 9 and 6, who are United States citizens. Applicant also has a
brother who resides in the United States, and is a naturalized United States citizen. His
brother is married and has two daughters in the United States. 
Applicant received a Ph.D. from an American university in 2002. He has been
employed by his present employer, a defense contractor, since 2011, and he seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Tr at
56-66, 90, 98.)  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence) 
The SOR lists seven allegations regarding Foreign Influence, under Adjudicative
Guideline B: 
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of
South Korea. Applicant speaks to his mother a few times a month. He does not provide
his mother or his father with any financial support. She has never been employed
outside of the home. (Tr at 98.) 
3
1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of
South Korea. Applicant speaks to his father once every month to two months. (Tr at 98.)
Applicant testified that his mother and father plan to immigrate to the United
States. They have not yet done so because they have to liquidate their property in
South Korea before they move, and because of the poor economy in South Korea over
the last several years, it has been difficult to do this. (Tr at 74-75.)
1.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s father-in-law is a citizen and resident
of South Korea. Applicant testified that he has contact with his father-in-law
approximately every three to six months. He had been a CEO of a large private
company. He does not plan to move to the United States. (Tr at 92-94.) 
1.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s brother-in-law is a citizen and
resident of South Korea. Applicant testified that he has contact with his brother-in-law
approximately every four to six months. He is currently a college student in the United
States, although he does plan to return to South Korea. (Tr at 95-96.)  
  
1.e. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s wife’s extended family members are
citizens and residents of South Korea. Applicant does have a relationship with one of
his wife’s aunts, and he does see them when he travels to South Korea. (Tr at 95-96.) 
 
1.f. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant owns real estate in South Korea worth
an estimated $200,000. Applicant testified that this property was purchased by his
father without Applicant’s knowledge or approval, and he only learned about it several
years after the purchase had been made. Applicant indicated that while he did not want
the property, he did not want to force his father to sell the property during the drop in the
economy, which would have forced his father to take a substantial loss. (Tr at 79-81.)
Applicant did concede that as of this time, the property is still in his name and has not
been transferred back to his father. (Tr at 87-88 .)  
1.g. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s wife owns a bank account in South
Korea worth an estimated $40,000. Applicant testified that this money had been his
wife’s separate money, and she has transferred all of the money from that account to a
United States bank. (Tr at 77-78.) 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference) 
The SOR lists one allegation regarding Foreign Preference, under Adjudicative
Guideline C.
 
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant exercised his South Korean citizenship
by possessing a South Korean passport issued on May 4, 2011, and not scheduled to
expire until May 4, 2021. 
At the hearing, Applicant explained that he renewed his South Korean passport
in 2011, before he became a United States citizen. He was planning to take a trip to
4
South Korea and he learned that he needed to renew his South Korean passport, which
had less than six months left on it before it expired, if he was to be able to use it to allow
him to re-enter the United States. Applicant testified that he received his United States
passport in February 2012, shortly after he became a United States citizen, and he
never used his South Korean passport after he received his United States passport.
Applicant further testified, and Exhibit D establishes, that Applicant surrendered his
current South Korean passport to his employer’s facility security officer, and the South
Korean passport was destroyed. (Tr at 67-71.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted two property appraisals showing that the home in which he
lives is appraised for the amount of $1,050,000. Applicant has also recently completed
the purchase of a condominium as a rental property, which has been appraised for
$423,000. (Exhibits G and I.) Post-hearing Exhibit B shows the property was sold to
Applicant for $415,000. 
Applicant testified that his estimated total net worth in the United States exceeds
$2 million. (Tr at 88.) In post-hearing Exhibit A, Applicant showed that after a more
thorough analysis his net worth is $1,541,313. 
As reviewed above, Applicant’s father testified on his behalf. He confirmed that
he purchased the property in South Korea as a gift for his son, without his son’s
knowledge or approval, and without any financial input from his son. He further testified,
and Exhibit B established, that this property in South Korea is for sale. Applicant’s father
also testified that his own home in South Korea is for sale, and once that property has
been sold, he and Applicant’s mother will move to the United States. He anticipates that
the sale will occur sometime in 2015. (Tr at 26-37.) 
Applicant testified that he has no intention to ever return to live in South Korea.
Towards that end, he has never registered his two sons as citizens of South Korea; they
are only United States citizens, and they only have United States passports. (Tr at 83-
85.) He also stated that, with the exception of his parents, he does not have close
relationships with any other citizens or residents of South Korea. (Tr at 85-86.) 
Current Status of South Korea
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding South Korea. South
Korea has a history of collecting protected U.S. information. South Korea has been
ranked as one of the seven countries most actively engaging in foreign economic
collection and industrial espionage against the United States, and it has been the
unauthorized recipient of technology controlled under U.S. export controls. (Exhibit 2.)
5
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
6
Analysis
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B -  Foreign Influence)
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding Foreign Influence: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Those that could be applicable in this case include the following: AG ¶ 7
(a) “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.” Applicant’s family members, who are citizens and residents of South Korea,
make AG ¶ 7(a) a concern to the Government. AG ¶ 7 (e) “a substantial business,
financial, or property interest in a foreign country . . . which could subject the individual
to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation” is also applicable because of
Applicant’s property in South Korea. 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I find that AG ¶
8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest,” is applicable to this Applicant because of the following: Applicant, his wife, his
two sons, and his brother and his brother’s family are all United States citizens and
residents. Applicant received his Ph.D. in the United States, and he has a net worth of
more that $1.5 million here. His parents plan to move to the United States as soon as it
is financially feasible. Finally Applicant testified credibly and convincingly that his loyalty
lies with the United States, and he has no divided loyalty with South Korea. 
Because of Applicant’s significant assets in the United States, I also find AG ¶
8(f) applicable, “the value . . . [of the] property interests is such that they are unlikely to
result in a conflict and could not be used to effectively to influence, manipulate, or
pressure the individual.” As a result of all of these factors, I conclude Guideline B for
Applicant.
7
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
 Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “When an
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
Applicant’s application, receipt, and retention of a South Korean passport raises
foreign preference concerns under disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a) as the “exercise of
any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship.”
Applicant’s dual citizenship was based solely on his birth in a foreign country, and
he applied for the current South Korean passport before he became a United States
citizen. Additionally, Applicant never used his South Korean passport after he became a
United States citizen, and he has now destroyed his South Korean passport. Therefore,
I find that mitigating conditions AG ¶ 11(a), (c) and (e) apply to this case. After
considering all of the evidence of record under Guideline C, I conclude that the
mitigating evidence substantially outweighs any disqualifying evidence. 
Whole-Person Concept
      Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
 
       (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
        Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
         I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case under Guidelines B and C. Based on all
of the reasons cited above as to why the mitigating conditions are applicable and
controlling under both Guidelines, I find that the evidence leaves me with no significant
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
8
Formal Findings
         Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
                   Paragraph 1, Guideline B:             FOR APPLICANT
                            Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.g.:              For Applicant
                   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:             FOR APPLICANT
                           Subparagraph 2.a.:                        For Applicant
Conclusion
           In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
