 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-01655 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference trustworthiness concerns, but failed to 
mitigate the foreign influence trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign 
preference. The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 21, 2014, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and he elected to 
have his case decided on the written record. On February 26, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
mailed to Applicant and it was received on April 30, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant submitted additional information. There were no objections to any of the 
documents offered. The Government and Applicant’s exhibits are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2015.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
As part of the FORM, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about the People’s Republic of China (China). Applicant did not 
object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the FORM that is 
supported by source documents from official U.S. Government publications. I have sua 
sponte taken administrative notice of certain facts about Hong Kong that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He was born in Hong Kong and entered the United 
States in 1997. He attended college in the U.S. from 1997 to 2000 and earned a 
bachelor’s degree. He married in 2003. His wife was also born in Hong Kong. He 
became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 2012. His wife also became a 
naturalized citizen, but it is unknown what year. They have twin seven-year-old sons 
who were born in the United States. Applicant has been employed by a federal 
contractor since March 2005.1 
 
 Applicant’s father, mother, and brother are citizens and residents of Hong Kong, 
a Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China. Applicant has 
weekly contact with his parents and brother. His parents work for different private 
medical laboratories. It is unknown if the laboratories are affiliated in any way with the 
government. His brother’s occupation is unknown.2 Applicant’s father-in-law is also a 
citizen and resident of Hong Kong. He is retired. It is unknown if he receives any type of 
pension or services from the government. Applicant has annual contact with his father-
in-law by telephone. When Applicant visits Hong Kong he will visit with his father-in-law. 
The extent of contact Applicant’s wife has with her father is unknown.  
 
 Applicant traveled to Hong Kong in 2002 (twice), 2003, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2009 
(twice), 2010, and 2013. He visited his parents, brother, and father-in-law while there.3  
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 3, 4. 
 
3 
 In November 2005, Applicant was issued a Chinese passport that was valid until 
November 2015. In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a statement that he 
“destroyed/invalidated his Chinese passport.” He noted that the China does not permit 
dual citizenship. He provided a copy of the passport showing the corners had been cut, 
thereby invalidating it. Since becoming a U.S. citizen he has exclusively used his U.S. 
passport when traveling. 
 
 Applicant has never voted in Hong Kong. He has not served in the Chinese 
military. He has not exercised any rights, privileges, or benefits from Hong Kong or 
China since becoming a U.S. citizen. He has no financial interests in Hong Kong or 
China. His job and family are in the United States, and he has no plans of returning to 
China to live.4 
 
China5 
 
 China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP). CCP members hold almost all the top government, police, and military 
positions. China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA), which is the consolidated military 
organization for China’s land, sea, strategic missile, and air force, is pursuing long-term, 
comprehensive modernization of its military force. China has articulated roles and 
missions for the PLA that go beyond China’s coastal borders.  
 
 There is severe official repression of the freedoms of speech, religion, 
association and harsh restrictions on movement by the government of China. There are 
human rights problems within China including: extrajudicial killings; prolonged illegal 
detentions at unofficial holding facilities; torture and coerced confessions; lack of due 
process in judicial proceedings; monitoring communications; and failure to respect 
academic and artistic freedom, among other things. China does not recognize dual 
citizenship. 
 
 China is the world’s most active and persistent perpetrator of economic 
espionage and is a growing and persistent threat to U.S. economic security. China 
utilizes a large, well-organized network of enterprises, defense factories, affiliated 
research institutes, and computer network operations to facilitate the collection of 
sensitive information and export-controlled technology. 
 
 China uses state-sponsored industrial/technical espionage and economic 
espionage to obtain technologies and increase expertise available to support military 
research, development, and acquisition. China continues its efforts to acquire U.S. 
military and dual-use technologies including the use of its intelligence services through 
other than legal means. China is the most aggressive country conducting espionage 
against the United States. Multiple Chinese state entities are engaged in active efforts 
to acquire restricted U.S. technologies; the Chinese government also encourages and 
rewards the action of private individuals who obtain technology on its behalf.  
                                                          
4 Item 4. 
 
5 The FORM lists the official source documents. 
 
4 
 Key U.S. counterintelligence officials suggest that the Chinese intelligence 
collection effort is growing in scale, intensity and sophistication and represents a 
substantial threat to the U.S. national security. The U.S. Justice Department reports 
many cases since 2008 that involve actual and attempted espionage and illegal export 
of sensitive technology to China.  
 
Hong Kong6 
 
 Hong Kong has been a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China since July 
1, 1997, ending more than 150 years of British colonial rule. Hong Kong has a high 
degree of autonomy, except in the areas of defense and foreign police, which are the 
responsibility of China. The Hong Kong SAR is headed by a Chief Executive voted on 
by an Election Committee made up of approximately 800 Hong Kong residents from 
four constituency groups, including the China’s National People’s Congress. Under 
Chinese nationality law, persons of Chinese descent who were born on the Chinese 
mainland or Hong Kong are considered citizens of China. 
 
 While Hong Kong remains a free and open society where human rights are 
respected, courts are independent, and there is a well-established respect for the rule of 
law, the most important human rights problems reported were the limited ability of 
citizens to participate in and change their government through the right to vote in free 
and fair elections, limitations on freedom of the press and incidents of violence against 
the media, and a legislature with limited power in which certain sectors of society 
wielded disproportionate political influence. Other human rights problems included 
denial of visas for political reasons, trafficking in persons, reports of arbitrary arrest or 
detention, and other aggressive police tactics hampering the freedom of assembly, and 
society prejudices against certain ethnic minorities. The government took steps to 
prosecute and punish officials who committed abuses. 7  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for  
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
                                                          
6 http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2747.htm.  
 
7 http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsreport/index htm?dynamic load id=236436&year=2014#wrapper; 
http//travel.state.gov/content/passport/English/country/hongkong.html 
 
5 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the trustworthiness concern involving foreign preference is as 
follows: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
 
6 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country. 
Applicant held a Chinese passport that will not expire until November 2015. I find 
his actions of possessing a current foreign passport falls within the above disqualifying 
condition.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and the following 
is potentially applicable: 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
In response to the FORM, Applicant invalidated his Chinese passport. China 
does not recognize dual citizenship. Since becoming a U.S. citizen he has only traveled 
using his U.S. passport. AG ¶ 11(e) applies.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the trustworthiness concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
7 
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(c) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. 
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.8  
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.”9 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue.10  
 
Applicant has close family ties to his parents, brother, and father-in-law in Hong 
Kong. It is unknown the extent of ties his wife has to her father in Hong Kong. Applicant 
has weekly contact with his family and visits them regularly, along with his father-in-law. 
China has a significant history of conducting espionage against the United States, to 
gain access to both industrial and military information. It has a poor human rights 
record. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 
and 7(c) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
9 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **16-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
10 See generally; ISCR Case. No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activities in area where family members 
resided. 
 
8 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this trustworthiness determination under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns are reduced where contact and correspondence with 
foreign citizens are casual and infrequent because the risk of foreign exploitation or 
pressure is less. Applicant has frequent contact with his parents and brother, 
communicating with them weekly. He visits them and his father-in-law regularly. The 
extent of contact his wife has with her father is unknown. Applicant’s contact with his 
family is not infrequent or casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
The foreign influence concerns are increased because China aggressively and 
actively engages in foreign economic collection and industrial espionage against the 
United States. It is unknown whether Applicant’s parents have contact through their 
work with the Chinese government. Applicant’s brother’s profession is unknown. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s familial connections in Hong Kong 
would make it unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose 
between his family interests and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply.  
 
Applicant is a relatively recent naturalized citizen of the United States. He 
obviously has significant ties to his parents and brother and travels to Hong Kong 
regularly to visit them. While there he also visits his father-in-law. The extent of his 
wife’s contact with her father is unknown. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
there is no conflict of interest, either because Applicant’s sense of loyalty or obligation to 
the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or Applicant has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that he can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
There is insufficient evidence to make a determination regarding Applicant’s 
family’s association with the Chinese government or their vulnerability to government 
 
9 
coercion. Although it is possible that Applicant’s relatives in Hong Kong do not pose a 
security risk, I do not have sufficient information to make that determination. I find AG ¶ 
8(b) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 36 years old, married, and the father of two children. He immigrated 
to the United States as a student in 1997 and became a naturalized citizen in 2012. He 
maintains frequent contact with his parents, brother, and father-in-law who are residents 
of Hong Kong. He held an active Chinese passport that he recently invalidated. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a public trust position. Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference, but failed to mitigate the concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  
 
10 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
