KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline K
DIGEST: There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence. 
The Judge is not required to cite or discuss every piece of evidence.  On the record the Judge’s
findings of deliberate falsification are sustainable.  Applicant is entitled to receive an SOR that
places him on reasonable notice of the allegations.  An SOR is not required to satisfy the strict
requirements of a criminal indictment, nor does it have to allege every possible fact that may be
relevant.  A Favorable security clearance decision does not give an applicant the right to retain a
security clearance regardless of subsequent events or changed circumstances.  The appealing
party must set forth claims of error with specificity.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 04-08806.a1
DATE: 05/08/2007
DATE: May 8, 2007
In Re:
--------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-08806
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 30, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and
Guideline K (Security Violations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 27, 2006, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his findings;
whether the Judge erred in concluding Applicant’s falsifications of his security clearance application,
two documents filed in state judicial proceedings, and a signed, sworn statement to a government
investigator, were deliberate; whether the SOR placed Applicant on reasonable notice of the
allegations against him; whether the Judge was barred by the doctrine of res judicata from
considering evidence of “settled past cases” relating to the allegations set forth in the SOR; whether
the Judge’s overall adverse security clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
(1) Applicant argues that the Judge erred with respect to six of his findings, in that the
“summary” presented by the Judge in his decision omitted certain facts, and did not reflect the full
nature and circumstances of the incidents at issue.  The Board does not find Applicant’s argument
persuasive. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence unless
he specifically states otherwise. See, e.g., DOHA Case No. 96-0228 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 1997);
DISCR Case No. 93-1186 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 1995).  Moreover, the Judge is not required to cite
or discuss every piece of record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03143 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec.
20, 2006); DISCR Case No. 90-1596 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 1992).
Several of the findings which Applicant challenges relate to SOR allegations on which the
Judge found in favor of the Applicant.  With respect to the remaining ones, even if each of the
challenged findings were changed to reflect Applicant’s interpretation of the record evidence, the
changes would not have undermined the Judge’s ultimate conclusions.  Therefore, any such errors
would be at best harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-00949 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2007); ISCR
Case No. 05-08459 at 2, n. 1 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2006).  
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).   The Board does not review a case de novo.  Applicant has not met his burden of
demonstrating that the Judge’s material findings with respect to Applicant’s conduct of security
concern do not reflect a reasonable or plausible interpretation of the record evidence.  Considering
the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial evidence and are sustainable. 
Applicant’s Appeal Brief at 6.1
The adverse information which Applicant failed to disclose related to his prior employment, a state tax lien,2
a prior investigation by the police, and a prior denial of clearance access.
Applicant’s Appeal Brief at 8.3
3
(2) Applicant also contends that he did not deliberately falsify his security clearance
application, two documents filed in state judicial proceedings, and a signed, sworn statement to a
government investigator, because “[o]ne need not report items of no consequence.”   The Board does1
not find this argument persuasive.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.   The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or2
reject Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s findings of deliberate falsification are
sustainable.   See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-03849 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 26,
2006).
(3) Applicant argues that the SOR did not place him on reasonable notice of the allegations
against him because: “The action of de-facto adding to the Statement of Reasons by admitting new
evidence (as occurred in our case) we consider to be a breach of FRCP Rule 15 and other as
appropriate.”   The Board does not find this argument persuasive.3
Applicant is entitled to receive an SOR that places him on reasonable notice of the allegations
being made against him.  However, an SOR is an administrative pleading that is not required to
satisfy the strict requirements of a criminal indictment, and it does not have to allege every possible
fact that may be relevant at the hearing.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 24,
2003).  Nor does an SOR have to indicate what arguments Department Counsel might make at the
hearing, nor does the SOR have to identify specific evidence that Department Counsel will rely on
at the hearing.  Considering the record as a whole, the Board concludes that the SOR issued to
Applicant placed him on adequate notice of the allegations being made against him.  Furthermore,
a review of the hearing transcript does not leave the Board with the impression that the SOR
prejudiced in any identifiable way Applicant’s ability to prepare for the hearing, his ability to
participate in the hearing, his ability to raise objections or make arguments on his behalf, or his
ability to present evidence for the Judge to consider in his case.  Given the SOR allegations against
Applicant and the manner in which the hearing was conducted, Applicant was on adequate notice
of the factual circumstances that formed the basis of the government’s security concerns in his case.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-24428 at 3 (App. Bd. May 3, 2006).  Moreover, the record indicates that
the Judge declined to admit into evidence a number of government exhibits that he ruled were
irrelevant or beyond the scope of the allegations contained in the SOR.  There is no presumption of
error below, and Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge’s evidentiary rulings were erroneous.
(4) Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse clearance decision should be reversed because
the Judge was barred by the doctrine of res judicata from considering evidence of his past relating
to some of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  The Board does not find this argument persuasive.
4
Res judicata involves issue preclusion when the same claim or cause of action has been
litigated previously.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 97-0191 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 28, 1998).  It has no
applicability in this case.  Applicant was granted a security clearance after a DISCR hearing in 1986.
Applicant reapplied for a security clearance in 2000 and was asked to complete a security clearance
application.  On that application, Applicant did not reveal past conduct and events relating to his
finances, employment and prior security clearances.  The scope of some of the questions on the
security clearance application required Applicant to divulge events that predated 1986.  On appeal,
Applicant argues that because his security clearance eligibility was favorably adjudicated in 1986,
any facts or circumstances arising before 1986 cannot provide a basis for an adverse security
clearance decision in the instant case.
A favorable security clearance decision does not give an applicant the right to retain a
security clearance regardless of subsequent events or changed circumstances.  See, e.g., DISCR Case
No. 86-3543 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 1989).  Accordingly, the doctrine of res judicata does not bar
an adverse security clearance decision when an applicant has engaged in misconduct subsequent to
a favorable security clearance decision.  DISCR Case No. 91-1436 at 4 (May 3, 1993); DISCR Case
No. 91-0775 at 3 (Aug. 25, 1992).  In this case, Applicant’s history prior to 1986, in and of itself,
does not form the basis for the SOR allegations.  Rather, Applicant’s failure to provide truthful
answers in 2000 about events prior to 1986 when required to do so by the questions on his security
clearance application forms the basis for some of the allegations in the SOR.  The mere fact that
Applicant obtained a favorable security clearance determination in 1986 did not relieve him of the
duty, subsequently, to answer security clearance application questions truthfully, even when those
questions required the revealing of information that predated 1986.  This is consistent with the basic
proposition that when reevaluating an applicant’s security eligibility in keeping with the “whole
person” concept, such a reevaluation should consider the applicant’s overall history, not just the most
recent instances of the applicant’s conduct.  Thus, since Applicant’s underlying conduct and
circumstances that predated 1986 could have been considered in the instant case, his failure to list
the same underlying conduct and circumstances on a 2000 security clearance application provide a
proper basis for the falsification allegations in this case.   
(5) Finally, Applicant argues, in essence, that the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision
is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  Part of Applicant’s argument is based on the assertion
that the Judge’s decision should be reversed because it contains multiple “errors of logic.”
Applicant’s Appeal Brief does not elaborate on or enumerate with specificity what these “errors of
logic” are.  The appealing party must set forth its claims of error with specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 99-0519 at 9 (App. Bd. Feb. 23, 2001).  Applicant has failed to so in this instance.  
Regarding the broader issue of whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law, the application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors
does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some
mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
5
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
recency and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant under Guideline K and with
respect to two of factual allegations under Guideline E.  However, the Judge reasonably explained
why the evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all
of the government’s security concerns.  As noted above, the Board does not review a case de novo.
The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s
decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App.
Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable
clearance decision under Guideline E is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
