KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Record evidence supports the Judge’s finding that Applicant knowingly falsified
his 2000 security clearance application.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-03948.a1
DATE: 05/21/2007
DATE: May 21, 2007
In Re:
------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-03948
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Philip D. Cave, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 22, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 23, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative
2
Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr. denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
submitted a timely appeal pursuant to Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.   
Applicant submits the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge properly evaluated the
available mitigating factors; whether the Judge properly applied the whole person concept; and
whether the Judge’s adverse clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding
no error, we affirm.
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
Applicant first applied for a security clearance in 2000.  In completing the application, he
denied that he had used drugs, deliberately concealing his use of marijuana between January 1997
and May 2000.  In early 2002, he executed another application, for a higher level clearance.  The
answers on this form were identical to those supplied in 2000, including the denial of wrongful drug
use.  Applicant asserted that he was not aware that he had been proposed for a higher clearance,
denying that it was he who had completed the 2002 security clearance application.  The Judge
concluded that “[t]his statement is incredible because Applicant signed the application and because
he was interviewed by an investigator from the Defense Security Service (DSS) in 2003, as part of
the investigation for a higher clearance.  He variously claimed that he must have signed the second
application without reviewing it.”  Decision at 2 (internal citation omitted).
During this interview in 2003, he did not inform the investigator of his drug history.
However, in 2004 he was nominated by his employer for special access to work on contracts for a
non-DoD client.  In September 2004, he completed a third application and on this one he disclosed
his marijuana use.  In response to Question 27, he admitted that he had used marijuana 15 times
between January 1997 and May 2004.  In response to Question 28, he stated that he had used
marijuana 7 times between April and August 2004.  Concerning the latter period of use, Applicant
advised that he had been on a leave of absence from his employer at the time, hiking the Appalachian
Trail and had used marijuana in the company of other hikers. 
Applicant stated that he finally reported his drug use because “he now understood the
importance of the drug questions and wanted to make a clean breast of things.”  Decision at 3
(internal citation omitted).  Applicant denied that he disclosed his drug use only because he knew
he was facing a polygraph as part of the 2004 application, although the Judge found that this denial
is contradicted by Applicant’s own evidence and by the testimony of a company investigator.
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of fact is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s findings
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
Applicant contends that the Judge should have found his drug use to be not recent as of the close of the record.1
However, the Directive does not define “recent.” The Judge is  required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and
reach a reasonable conclusion as to the recency of an applicant’s conduct.  ISCR Case 04-03849 (App. Bd. Jan. 26,
2006). 
3
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1. 
Applicant has not explicitly challenged the Judge’s findings.  However, Applicant’s appeal
brief denies that he deliberately falsified his application forms, implying a challenge to the Judge’s
contrary findings.  We will address this issue in our discussion below. 
 
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. V. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 581, 528 (1988). The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3. 
“The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does
not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather,
their application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”
See ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).   As stated above, Applicant contends
that it is error for the Judge to have found his false answers to be deliberate.  However, the record
evidence supports the Judge’s findings that Applicant knowingly falsified his 2000 application.  The
record also supports the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had knowingly falsified his 2002
application.  The Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s explanations (that he was not
aware that the application had been submitted or that he signed it without verifying its contents) were
implausible.  Applicant’s credibility was further diminished by his efforts to explain his decision
finally to admit his drug use.  Though implying that he did so because he had come to realize the
“seriousness of the question,” his own evidence suggested that his actual motivation was the
upcoming lifestyle polygraph which his proposed new duties necessitated, through which his drug
use would have most likely been discovered.  Therefore, the Judge’s finding that Applicant
knowingly provided false information about his drug history is supported by substantial record
evidence.  
We note that “there is a strong presumption against  granting a security clearance.” 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert den 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once theth
government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
establish any appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.  The Judge’s findings of
fact, including the one challenged on appeal, support his decision that Applicant had failed in
meeting his burden.   Furthermore, we find no error in his whole person analysis.  The Judge took1
4
into account Applicant’s evidence as to his good work record and integrity.  However, he also
balanced that against contravening matters, such as the fact that Applicant’s most recent use of
marijuana occurred while he held a security clearance and that the circumstances surrounding his
eventual admission of drug use vitiates his claims of  good faith.  Decision at 5.   We conclude that
the Judge’s whole person analysis complies with the requirements of Directive  ¶  E2.2.1, in that the
Judge considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct in reaching his decision.  See ISCR Case No.
04-09959 at 6 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006).    Accordingly the Judge’s adverse clearance decision is
neither arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to law.
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                   
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
