KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is sustainable.  The favorable evidence
cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious or contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-04874.a1
DATE: 05/23/2007
DATE: May 23, 2007
In Re:
---------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-04874
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 19, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided upon the written record.  On
The Judge found in favor of Applicant under Guideline J.  That favorable finding is not at issue on appeal.1
Applicant’s Brief at 1.2
2
December 27, 2006, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding
Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application was deliberate; whether the Judge erred
by concluding that the security concerns raised under Guidelines E had not been mitigated.
(1) Applicant contends that he did not deliberately falsify his security clearance application
by failing to disclose his 2003 arrest and conviction for Battery Causing Bodily Injury.  The Board
does not find this argument persuasive.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.  The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject
Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omission was
deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; ISCR Case No. 04-03849 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006).
(2) In the alternative, Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the security
concerns raised by his falsification had not been mitigated.  In support of that contention, Applicant
argues that “[he] disclosed all details of [his] arrest to the investigators without provocation.”2
Applicant’s contention does not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the
trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
recency and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions.  The Judge reasonably explained why the evidence which Applicant
had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns.  The
Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  The security concerns raised by Applicant’s
falsification were not necessarily overcome by Applicant’s subsequent disclosures to the
3
government.  See ISCR Case No. 01-19513 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 22, 2004).  Given the record that was
before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline E is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
