KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence. 
Trustworthiness determinations are not limited to consideration of an applicant’s job
performance or conduct during duty hours.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-07581.a1
DATE: 05/17/2007
DATE: May 17, 2007
In Re:
-------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Designation
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-07581
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On May 3, 2006,
DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
2
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 10, 2006, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Joseph Testan denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge erred by concluding that
the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guidelines F and E had not been mitigated.
Applicant argues that the Judge erred in concluding that the trustworthiness concerns raised
under Guidelines F and E had not been mitigated, in that he gave insufficient weight to the fact that
Applicant was a motivated, devoted, hard-working employee, who was an expert in her field, and
who was not a threat to the Department of Defense.  Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that
the Judge erred.
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence unless
he specifically states otherwise. See, e.g., DOHA Case No. 96-0228 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 1997).
The Judge is not required to cite or discuss every piece of record evidence.  See, e.g., DISCR Case
No. 90-1596 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 1992).  The federal government has a strong interest in
protecting sensitive information and, pursuant to that interest, has to decide whether persons to be
entrusted with access to such information are at risk of deliberately or inadvertently mishandling it.
In making such decisions, the government must determine whether a given person possesses and
exhibits the high degree of judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness required of persons granted
access to that information.  Trustworthiness determinations are not limited to consideration of an
applicant's job performance or conduct during duty hours, and off-duty conduct can be relevant in
assessing an applicant's security eligibility.  An applicant's technical expertise (or lack thereof) is not
a measure of whether the applicant is at risk of deliberately or inadvertently mishandling sensitive
information, nor is it a measure of whether the applicant demonstrates the high degree of judgment,
reliability, or trustworthiness required of persons granted access to such information.  An applicant
with technical expertise may through conduct or circumstances demonstrate that he or she poses a
trustworthiness risk; an applicant without any technical expertise may through conduct or
circumstances demonstrate that he or she is a good candidate for a favorable trustworthiness
determination.  The trustworthiness significance of the conduct alleged under Guidelines F and E
does not turn on whether Applicant possesses a technical ability that could be useful to a DoD
contact or project.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-06033 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2005).
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As
the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
3
relevant mitigating conditions.  He reasonably explained why the evidence which the Applicant had
presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all the government’s trustworthiness concerns.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination under Guidelines F and E is sustainable.
Order
The determination of the Judge denying Applicant access to automated information systems
in ADP I/II/II sensitivity positions is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields      
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
