KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant was convicted of Reckless Homicide and sentenced to more than one year in
prison. Because he was incarcerated for more than one year, 10 U.S.C. 986 precludes him from
receiving a security clearance. Clearance is denied, but waiver recommended.
CASENO: 06-17842.h1
DATE: 05/23/2007
DATE: May 23, 2007
In Re:
----------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-17842
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOSEPH TESTAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Ray T. Blank, Jr., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant was convicted of Reckless Homicide and sentenced to more than one year in
prison. Because he was incarcerated for more than one year, 10 U.S.C. 986 precludes him from
receiving a security clearance. Clearance is denied, but waiver recommended.
 See, Footnote 1 under Disqualifying Condition c of the Criminal Conduct guideline.1
2
 STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On August 25, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant and recommended referral to
an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on September 8, 2006, and elected to have his
case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the
Government's written case (FORM) on or about September 29, 2007. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 16, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 34 year old employee of a defense contractor.
In March 2000, applicant was involved in a traffic accident that resulted in a death. In 2001,
he pleaded guilty to the charge of Reckless Homicide, and was sentenced to ten years in prison, all
but three of which were suspended. He was incarcerated for 18 months. He was also placed on
probation for two years.
CONCLUSIONS
In March 2000, applicant was involved in a traffic accident that resulted in a death. In 2001,
he was convicted of Reckless Homicide and sentenced to 10 years in prison. He actually served
about 18 months in prison. Disqualifying Conditions b. (a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses), and c. (conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a crime and
sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year) are applicable.
Although applicant’s criminal conduct was clearly serious, this isolated incident occurred
over six years ago. In addition, this criminal conduct is of the type that is unlikely to recur. Based
on these facts, applicant qualifies for Mitigating Conditions a. (the criminal behavior was not
recent), b. (the crime was an isolated incident) and d. (the person did not voluntarily commit the act
and/or the factors leading to the violation are not likely to recur).
Given the passage of time since applicant engaged in this isolated act of criminal conduct,
the unintentional nature of the crime, and the absence of any evidence of subsequent misconduct or
criminal conduct on the part of applicant, I conclude that he is unlikely to engage in criminal conduct
in the future. If it were not for 10 U.S.C. 986, I would conclude that it is now clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant him access to classified information. In light of this statute, however,
I must conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant applicant a security
clearance.  I recommend further consideration of this case for a waiver of 10 U.S.C. 986.1
3
FORMAL FINDINGS
PARAGRAPH 1: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant.
Joseph Testan
Administrative Judge
