KEYWORD: Drugs; Alcohol; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: The Applicant’s last Drug Involvement, marijuana, is not recent, having occurred more
than 16 months ago.  He has also “signed [a] statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.”  When interviewed by an investigator, he was candid as to his past Drug
Involvement and Alcohol Consumption.  However, his continued excessive consumption of alcohol
is problematic.  The Applicant last consumed the intoxicant, to the point that he was under its
influence, in February of 2007, only three months ago.  Mitigation is not shown as to his Alcohol
Consumption.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-17610.h1
DATE: 05/17/2007
DATE: May 17, 2007
In Re:
----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-17610
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
RICHARD A. CEFOLA
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
The Applicant’s last Drug Involvement, marijuana, is not recent, having occurred more than
16 months ago.  He has also “signed [a] statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance
for any violation.”  When interviewed by an investigator, he was candid as to his past Drug
Involvement and Alcohol Consumption.  However, his continued excessive consumption of alcohol
is problematic.  The Applicant last consumed the intoxicant, to the point that he was under its
influence, in February of 2007, only three months ago.  Mitigation is not shown as to his Alcohol
Consumption.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On November 27, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
Applicant filed an Answer to the SOR on or about December 18, 2006.
The case was originally assigned to another judge, but reassigned and received by the
undersigned on March 27, 2007.  Pursuant to a request from the Government, a continuance was
granted, and an amended notice of hearing was issued on March 27, 2007.  The case was heard on
April 25, 2007.  The Government submitted documentary evidence.  Testimony was taken from the
Applicant, who also  submitted documentary evidence.  The transcript (TR) was received on May
4, 2007.  The issues raised here are whether the Applicant's past Drug Involvement, alleged Personal
Conduct, and admitted Alcohol Consumption militate against the granting of a security clearance.
[The Applicant admits the underlying factual basis of most of the allegations, except for Paragraph
3 of the SOR, as he denies any lack of candor during his interview by an investigator.]
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the documents
and the live testimony.  The Applicant is 29 years of age, and is employed by a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance on behalf of the Applicant.  After a complete and thorough review
of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same, I make the following
additional Findings of Fact.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement & Guideline E - Personal Conduct
1.a. and 1.b.  The Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency, from about 1994, to his
last usage on December 31  2005 (TR at page 55 lines 3~17).  During the last year of his usage, hest
used marijuana “[o]nce every three months or less” (TR at page 73 line 10 to page 74 line 2).  He
3
also purchased marijuana on numerous occasions (Id).  He no longer associates with those with
whom he used drugs, and he has signed a statement of intent against any illegal Drug Involvement
in the future (TR at page 81 line 18 to page 82 line 7, and Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) H, the last
page, see also AppX B).
1.c. and 1.d.  The Applicant used ecstacy, with varying frequency, from about 1994 to his last
usage in March of 2000 (TR at page 55 line18 to page 58 line 25).  He used this hallucinogen about
7~11 times a year (TR at page 74 lines 6~21, and Government Exhibit (GX) 3 at pages 10~11).  The
Applicant also purchased ecstacy on numerous occasions (TR at page 55 line18 to page 58 line 25).
1.e.  The Applicant used cocaine, with varying frequency, from about 1996 to his last usage
in 1998 (TR at page 59 lines 1~4).  He used cocaine about once or twice a year (TR at page 74 lines
22~24, and GX 3 at pages 10~11).
1.f. and 1.g.  The Applicant used inhalants once or twice in 1998, and another hallucinogen,
psilocybin, in 1997 (TR at page 59 line 5 to page 61 line 5, at page 75 lines 1~4, and GX 3 at page
11).
3.b.  When interviewed by an investigator in April of 2006, the Applicant mistakenly thought
that he was only required to disclose his drug usage in the last seven years, as this was what he was
required to disclose on his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (QSP) (TR at page 69 line 20 to
page 76 line 11, at page 77 line 19 to page 78 line 15, and GX 1 at page 9).  I find no wilful
falsification here.
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption & Guideline E - Personal Conduct
2.a. and 2.b.  The Applicant consumed alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication from
about 1995 until about February of 2007 (TR at page 64 line 6 to page 65 line 1).  In January of
2000, he was arrested and subsequently pled guilty to Dry Wreckless driving (TR at page 65 line 2
to page 66 line 14, and GX 2).  The Applicant had consumed alcohol prior to this arrest (Id).  When
the Applicant drinks “six to seven plus” beers he feels under the influence of alcohol (TR at page
75 line 20 to page 77 line 7).  He typically drinks on weekends during sporting events, and to the
point of intoxication “3 to 6 times a year” (TR at page 64 line 12 to page 65 line 1, and GX 3 at page
2).
3.a. When interviewed by an investigator in April of 2006, the Applicant was unsure of what
the term “intoxicated” meant; and as such, disclosed the date of his last alcohol related arrest (TR
at page 66 line 15 to line 69 line 19, and at page 78 line 16 to page 80 at 6).  I find no wilful
falsification here.
Mitigation
Those who know the Applicant think most highly of him (AppX C).
POLICIES
4
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the 1992 Directive set forth both policy factors, and
conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern.  Furthermore, as set forth in the Directive,
each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense determination based upon
consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent criteria and adjudication
policy in enclosure 2, including as appropriate:
a. Nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct, and surrounding
circumstances.
b. Frequency and recency of the conduct.
c. Age and maturity of the applicant.
d. Motivation of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct
was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken with knowledge of
the consequence involved.
e. Absence or presence of rehabilitation.
f. Probability that circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in
the future.
The Administrative Judge, however, can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have
a reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.
The Government must make out a case under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), G (Alcohol
Consumption), and E (Personal Conduct); which establishes doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between an
applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with
respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in refutation,
explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past adverse conduct is unlikely
to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
A pattern of excessive Alcohol Consumption and illegal Drug Involvement raise questions
regarding an individual’s willingness or ability to protect classified information.  Unacceptable
Personal Conduct is conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  The Government must be able to place a high
degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations at
all times and in all places.  If an applicant has demonstrated a lack of respect for the law, there then
exists the possibility that an applicant may demonstrate the same attitude towards security rules and
regulations.
CONCLUSIONS
5
Considering first the Applicant’s past Drug Involvement, the Applicant  used marijuana, and
to a lesser extent other drugs, from about 1994 until his last usage in December of 2005.  The first
and third disqualifying conditions are therefore applicable.  There was “drug abuse,” and  “purchase”
of illegal drugs.  However, I find the second mitigating condition is applicable here, as the Applicant
has a “demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future.”  He has disassociated himself from
drug-using associates, and has signed a statement of intent, acknowledging an automatic revocation
of his clearance for any future violation.  Guideline H is found for the Applicant.
Considering next his Alcohol Consumption, there was a conviction in 2000, and continued
excessive consumption to at least February of 2007.  I find the first and third disqualifying conditions
applicable, as there is an “alcohol-related incident away from work,” and “binge consumption of
alcohol to the point of impaired judgement.”  He consumes 6~7 beers on some weekends while
watching sporting events.  I can find no countervailing mitigating condition.  Guideline G is found
against the Applicant.
Finally as to his alleged Personal Conduct, I find no lack of candor here.  When interviewed,
the Applicant disclosed the information that was required by the QSP.  There was no intent to
deceive the Government.  Furthermore, he disclosed all of his past Drug Involvement and Alcohol
Consumption six months later in response to written interrogatories (GX 3).  Guideline E is found
for the Applicant.
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not rebutted the Government's case regarding
his Alcohol Consumption.  The Applicant has thus not met the mitigating conditions of Guideline
E, and of Section E.2.2. of the Directive.  Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of
persuasion under Guideline E.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings required by paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: FOR THE APPLICANT
a. For the Applicant.
b. For the Applicant.
c. For the Applicant.
d. For the Applicant.
e. For the Applicant.
f. For the Applicant.
g. For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
a.  Against the Applicant.
b.  Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 3: FOR THE APPLICANT
6
a. For the Applicant.
b. For the Applicant.
Factual support and reasons for the foregoing are set forth in FINDINGS OF FACT and
CONCLUSIONS, supra.
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
