KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST:  Applicant has successfully mitigated the foreign influence security concern, as the record
evidence demonstrates that her connections to China are rather minimal or pro forma or both when
compared to her significant family, professional, and financial connections to the U.S.  Clearance
is granted. 
CASENO: 06-13601.h1
DATE: 05/31/2007
DATE:  May 31, 2007
In re:
-------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-13601
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROBERT J. TUIDER
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Paul A. Murphy, Esq.
SYNOPSIS
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended1
and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended and modified.
2
Applicant has successfully mitigated the foreign influence security concern, as the record
evidence demonstrates that her connections to China are rather minimal or pro forma or both when
compared to her significant family, professional, and financial connections to the U.S.  Clearance is
granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a security
clearance for Applicant.  On June 30, 2006, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)  detailing1
the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the
Directive.  Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 26, 2007, and elected to have a hearing
before an administrative judge.  
Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on November 30, 2006, and the case
was assigned to me on December 15, 2006.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 11, 2007,
scheduling the hearing for January 23, 2007.  Applicant appeared with counsel and the hearing took
place as scheduled. 
The government offered one document that was marked as Government Exhibit (GE) 1, and
was admitted into the record without objection.  Applicant submitted two documents that were
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, and were admitted into the record without objection.
DOHA received the transcript on February 7, 2007.
PROCEDURAL RULING
At the hearing, Department Counsel asked me to take administrative notice of Exhibits (Ex.)
I to IV, U.S. Department of State, Background Note: China, April 2006; U.S. Department of State,
China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau), Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2005,
March 8, 2006; U.S. House of Representatives, Report of the Select Committee On U.S. National
Security And Military/Commercial Concerns With The People’s Republic Of China, 1999; and
Interagency OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS), Intelligence Threat Handbook (2004), respectively.
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No.
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802
F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)).  The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR
proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or taken from government reports. See Stein,
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for
3
administrative notice).  Applicant did not object to my consideration of Exs. I to IV for purposes of
administrative notice. Tr. 10-12. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations except SOR ¶ 1.d., with
explanations.  Her admissions are incorporated into my findings, and after a thorough review of the
record, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 43-year-old married woman.  She was born and raised in the People’s Republic
of China (PRC), and at age 17 left home to pursue higher education and never returned home, but did
stay in the PRC.  She attended a university in the PRC and was awarded a bachelor of science degree
with a major in architectural design in September 1986.  
In May 1995, at age 31, Applicant came to the U.S. on a training visa and worked as a
manager for a software company.  Tr. 53.  Shortly after arriving in the U.S., she met her future
husband, who is also a native of the PRC, and married him in September 1999.  Applicant became
a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2003.  Her husband also became a naturalized U.S. citizen.
Applicant and her husband have two minor U.S. born children, a six-year-old daughter and a three-
year-old son.  
From June 1998 to August 1999, she participated in an applied developer internship at a
vocational school and was awarded a certificate.  After being awarded her certificate, she worked in
the high technology industry until she began her current position as a database analyst for a defense
contractor in October 2004.  She is a first time applicant for a security clearance.
Applicant’s parents are resident citizens of the PRC (SOR ¶ 1.a.).  Her mother is 72 years old
and her father is 77 years old.  Tr. 22, GE 1.  Both of her parents are hearing impaired which makes
any communication by telephone difficult, if not impossible.  Her parents do not have access to e-
mail.  Applicant does not exchange letters with her parents.  Tr. 23, 35.  Her father retired from the
post office approximately 25 years ago and is in very poor health.  Tr. 39.  Her mother is a retired
librarian and is also in poor health.  Tr. 41.  Neither of her parents were or are involved in political
activities in the PRC, nor are they agents in any capacity of the PRC government.  The last time she
spoke to a parent was in February 2006 and was unable to have a meaningful conversation because
of their hearing problems.  Tr. 43.
Applicant has a 50-year-old sister and a a 47-year-old sister who are resident citizens of the
PRC (SOR ¶ 1.b.).  She has not seen her older sister in 20 years and has no idea what she does for a
living.  She last spoke to her by telephone approximately two years ago to discuss her parents’ health
situation.  She described her relationship with her 47-year-old sister as the same as with her older
sister, i.e. virtually no contact whatsoever.  Tr. 24-25.  Applicant also has a 37-year-old brother who
is a resident citizen of the PRC (SOR ¶ 1.c.).  She does not know this brother, does not know his
profession, nor does she know how to get in touch with him.  Tr. 26.  Applicant has a 45-year-old
4
brother living in the U.S. employed as a biologist (SOR ¶ 1.d.).  He holds a “green card” and has a
pending application for U.S. citizenship.  Applicant’s contact with her brother living in the U.S. is
limited to an occasional visit over a holiday.  Tr. 48-51.  Applicant is not close with any of her
siblings.  Tr. 57-58.
From April 14, 2002 to May 1, 2002, Applicant visited the PRC for the first and only time
since she arrived in the U.S.  While there she had a chance encounter with one of her former college
classmates.  This classmate organized a small group of former classmates for an impromptu luncheon
(SOR ¶ 1.e.).  The only place Applicant went in the PRC was Beijing where she visited the Great
Wall and took in some authentic Chinese food.  Applicant has no plans to travel to the PRC.
Applicant did not see her parents or siblings during this visit to the PRC.
Applicant has no assets of any type in the PRC nor does she own any real or personal property
in the PRC.  Tr. 36.  By contrast, Applicant and her husband own two homes in the U.S., conduct all
of their banking in the U.S., volunteer at their local church and school, and have retirement accounts
in the U.S.  Their total net worth is $662,000.00.  Applicant regularly votes in the U.S. and exercises
all rights of citizenship.  Tr. 60-74.
Applicant stated she is a U.S. citizen first and that her loyalties are with the U.S.  She further
added that if she were contacted by a representative from the PRC, she would not provide any
information and report such contact to proper authority.  Tr. 28.
Applicant submitted two reference letters, both of whom were former co-workers.  The
collective sense of these letters is that Applicant is an individual of the highest character, who is
trustworthy with a very strong work ethic.  AE A and B.
As requested by Department Counsel, I took administrative notice or official notice of certain
matters about the PRC and the nature of its government as described in Exhibits I through IV, which
are summarized under subheading “PRC” of this decision.  I have considered these matters in making
my clearance decision. 
PRC
PRC has an authoritarian, Communist government. PRC has a poor human rights record,
suppresses political dissent, and practices arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture,
and other prisoner mistreatment.
PRC is a nuclear power with a large Army.  PRC is geographically vast, and has a population
of over one billion people.  It has significant resources, and an economy that in recent years has
expanded about 10% per year. PRC aggressively competes with the United States in many areas.
PRC’s competitive relationship with the United States exacerbates the risk posed by Applicant’s PRC
connections.  
PRC actively collects military, economic and proprietary, industrial information about the
United States because of the following circumstances: (1) its position as a global superpower; (2) its
military, political, and economic investments in the Pacific Rim and Asia; (3) its leading role in
development of advanced technology that PRC desires for economic growth; and (4) PRC considers
ISCR Case No. 96-0277 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 1997).2
ISCR Case No. 97-0016 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 31, 1997); Directive, ¶ E3.1.14.3
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).4
ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995); Directive, ¶ E3.1.15.5
ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995); Directive, E3.1.15.6
5
the large number of Americans of Chinese ancestry as intelligence targets. PRC’s active intelligence
gathering programs focus on sensitive and protected U.S. technologies. 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication guidelines which must be considered in
the evaluation of security suitability.  An administrative judge need not view the adjudicative
guidelines as inflexible ironclad rules of law.  Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines, when applied in conjunction with the factors set forth in the adjudicative
process provision in Paragraph E2.2., Enclosure 2 of the Directive, are intended to assist the
administrative judge in reaching fair and impartial common sense decisions.
Included in the guidelines are disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC)
applicable to each specific guideline.  In addition, each security clearance decision must be based on
the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the factors
listed in the Directive. Specifically, these are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
(2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence.  Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a
case can be measured against this policy guidance.
The sole purpose of a security clearance determination is to decide if it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant.   The government2
has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of the evidence.   Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to the4
applicant to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
her.   Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance5
decision.6
Egan, 484 U.S. at 528.7
Id.8
Id.; Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.9
Executive Order No. 10865 § 7.10
6
As noted by the Court in Egan, “it should be obvious that no one has a right to a security
clearance”  and “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations7
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant8
should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such
sensitive information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a9
determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.   It is merely an indication that the applicant has not10
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a
clearance.
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount concern.  The
objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment of a person’s
life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.  Indeed,
the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in considering the “whole
person” concept.  It recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts, omissions,
motivations and other variables.  Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking and careful
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Under Guideline B for foreign influence, a security concern may exist when an individual’s
immediate family, including cohabitants, and other persons to whom he or she may be bound by
affection, influence, or obligation, are not citizens of the United States or may be subject to duress.
These situations could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.  Contacts with citizens of other countries or financial interests in other
countries are also relevant to security determinations if they make an individual potentially vulnerable
to coercion, exploitation, or pressure.  Common sense suggests that the stronger the ties of affection
or obligation, the more vulnerable a person is to being manipulated if the relative, cohabitant, or close
associate is brought under control or used as a hostage by a foreign intelligence or security service.
Here, based on the record evidence as a whole, the government initially established its case
under Guideline B.  Applicant has family ties to the PRC through her parents and siblings.  In
addition, her trip to the PRC in 2002 is further evidence of connections to the PRC.  Taken together,
these circumstances raise a security concern under Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition (FI DC)
E2.A2.1.2.1.  An immediate family member, or person to whom the individual has close ties of
affection or obligation, is a citizen of, or resident or present in a foreign country.  The remaining DCs
do not apply based on the facts and circumstances here.
7
I have reviewed all the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and conclude that Foreign
Influence Mitigating Condition (FI MC) E2.A2.1.3.1. A determination that the immediate family
member(s), (spouse, father, mother, sons, daughters, brothers, sisters), cohabitant, or associate(s)
in question are not agents of a foreign power or in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in
a way that could force the individual to choose between loyalty to the person(s) involved and the
United States); and FI MC E2.A2.1.3.3. Contact and correspondence with foreign citizens are casual
and infrequent.  
The evidence shows Applicant’s immediate family members are not agents of the PRC
government or in positions that would raise a security concern for the Applicant.  To the contrary, her
parents are elderly, retired, hearing impaired, and in poor health and clearly outside the scope of
employment or positions that would target them for intelligence gathering.  Applicant’s relationship
with her remaining siblings has become so removed throughout the years that she does not know what
any of them do for a living.  
Since Applicant left the PRC 11 years ago, she has fully vested her life in her work and family
in the U.S.  Her contact with her immediate family members can hardly be described as close.  She
has not seen either of her two sisters in the PRC in over 20 years, and last spoke to her older sister
by telephone two years ago to discuss her parents’ health situation.  She does not know her brother
who lives in the PRC or anything about him.  She last attempted to speak to her parents by telephone
in February 2006 and had a strained conversation at best given their hearing problems.  Her
communication with her biologist-brother living in the U.S. is limited to telephone calls on holidays.
When Applicant visited the PRC in 2002, she did not see any of her immediate family
members which further demonstrates the distance that evolved between Applicant and her family
members residing in the PRC.  Her visit to the PRC was for recreation purposes and it was during her
visit she had a chance encounter with a former classmate who arranged an impromptu “reunion.”
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s
personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the
facts of a given case.”  ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).
The analysis does not necessarily end with the formal mitigating conditions, as other matters
under the whole-person concept may mitigate the security concern.  Although the record shows
Applicant has family ties to resident citizens of the PRC, these family ties are hardly close.
Concerning Applicant, her last contact with her sisters in the PRC was by telephone two years ago
and has had no contact with her brother in the PRC.  Her contact with her aged parents was in
February 2006 via a strained telephone call due to their hearing impairment.  Her contact with her
brother in the U.S. is limited to telephone calls around holidays.  Her visit to the PRC in 2002 did not
include a visit with any of her immediate family members and her contact with former classmates
occurred only after she met a classmate by chance.  Her relationships with her immediate family
members in the PRC are distant due to the length of time she has lived in the U.S. since 1995 and
geographic separation.  And her life, both personally and professionally, is firmly rooted in the U.S.
Applicant’s ties or connections to the U.S. are strong.  Since her arrival here, she can fairly be
described as a model immigrant.  After she completed her training, she has been gainfully employed
8
in computer-related positions and most recently as a database analyst.  Moreover, her professional
career and financial interests are clearly in the U.S. and that situation is unlikely to change.  
When Applicant became a U.S. citizen, she swore allegiance to the U.S.  Her spouse is also
a naturalized citizen, and her two children are U.S. citizens by birth.  Her ties to these family members
are stronger than her ties to family members in the PRC. Her closest family members are her husband
and children.  They are U.S. citizens and live with her.  Because her husband and children live in the
U.S., they are not vulnerable to coercion or exploitation by a foreign power.  The realistic possibility
of pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress with regard to her husband and children are low.  There
is no evidence she has ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the U.S.  She
testified credibly that she takes her loyalty to the U.S. very seriously.  She is well regarded by her
defense contractor employer and is considered loyal and trustworthy.
The record evidence demonstrates Applicant has all the indicators of a self-reliant, industrious,
mature, responsible, and trustworthy individual.  At this point in Applicant’s life, her connections to
the PRC are rather minimal or pro forma or both when compared to her significant family,
professional, and financial connections to the U.S.  After weighing the record evidence as a whole,
I conclude Applicant has successfully mitigated the foreign influence security concern raised by her
family ties to the PRC.  Accordingly, Guideline B is decided for Applicant.
To conclude, Applicant has met her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision.  In reaching my decision, I have considered the whole person concept, the clearly
consistent standard, and the appropriate factors and guidelines in the Directive. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
SOR ¶ 1. - Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a. - e.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted.
Robert J. Tuider
Administrative Judge
