KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: Applicant’s mother and nine siblings are citizens of Morocco. One sibling is a high-
ranking Moroccan government official. Applicant has strong ties of affection to these immediate
family members. He maintains regular, close contact with them. Determination of Trustworthiness
is denied.
CASENO: 06-14978.h1
DATE: 05/09/2007
DATE: May 9, 2007
In Re:
-----------------------
SSN: ----------------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Determination
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-14978
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOSEPH TESTAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmonds, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant’s mother and nine siblings are citizens of Morocco. One sibling is a high-ranking
2
Moroccan government official. Applicant has strong ties of affection to these immediate family
members. He maintains regular, close contact with them. Determination of Trustworthiness is
denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care System Program Office (CHCSPO), the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASDC3I), entered into a Memorandum of
Agreement which gave DOHA the responsibility to provide trustworthiness determinations for
contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions as defined in DoD Regulation
5200.2R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987.
On August 31, 2006, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant which
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to make or continue a determination of trustworthiness,
suitability, and eligibility for applicant to hold a sensitive Information Systems Position (ADP-
I/II/III).
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on September 25, 2006, and elected to have his
case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the
Government's written case (FORM) on or about February 16, 2007. Applicant filed a response to the
FORM on or about March 29, 2007. The case was assigned to me on April 16, 2007.
RULINGS ON PROCEDURE
Department Counsel’s Motion to amend SOR Paragraph 1.b., set forth on page 4 of the
FORM, is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 56 years of age. He was born in Morocco. He became a United States citizen in
1992. His spouse, to whom he has been married since 1984, was born in the United States. Their two
children were born in the United States.
Applicant’s mother and nine siblings are citizens of Morocco. His mother and seven siblings
reside in Morocco; one sibling resides in a third country and another resides in the United States.
One of applicant’s siblings is a high-ranking Moroccan government official, and as such, is  an agent
of Morocco.
Applicant traveled to Morocco in at least 1997, 1999, 2000 and 2002 to visit his family. He
 In his 2004 written statement to the OPM, applicant claimed he remains a Moroccan1
citizen because Moroccan government policy prohibits the renunciation of Moroccan citizenship
in situations like his.
In his 2004 written statement to the OPM, he stated, “I do understand my rights,2
privileges and obligations to both the United States and Morocco.”
“The government of Morocco considers all persons born to Moroccan fathers to be3
Moroccan citizens. In addition to being subject to all Moroccan laws, U.S. citizens who also
possess the nationality of Morocco may be subject to other laws that impose special obligations
on citizens of that country.” Consular Information Sheet, page 4. 
3
communicates with his mother every three to four weeks by telephone, and with his siblings once
a month by telephone.
In a written statement he gave to the OPM in October 2004, applicant stated he owned a “plot
of farm land” in Morocco. In his response to the SOR, he stated he no longer owns any property in
Morocco. 
CONCLUSIONS
The evidence establishes that applicant’s mother and nine siblings are citizens of Morocco,
and that his mother and seven of his siblings reside in Morocco. The evidence further establishes that
one of applicant’s siblings is a high-ranking government official and thus an agent of Morocco.
These facts require application of Disqualifying Conditions E2.A2.1.2.1 (an immediate family
member . . . is a citizen of, or resident or present in, a foreign country) and E2.A2.1.2.3 (relatives
. . . who are connected with any foreign government).
Once the Government established that Disqualifying Condition E2.A2.1.2.1 applied, the
burden shifted to applicant to provide facts that support the application of  Mitigating Condition
E2.A2.1.3.1 (a determination that the immediate family member(s) . . . in question are not agents
of a foreign power or in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way that could force the
individual to choose between loyalty to the person(s) involved and the United States). Applicant did
not meet his burden for two reasons: First, one of his siblings is an agent of Morocco. Second, the
limited evidence he presented does not establish his immediate family members are not in a position
to be exploited in a way that could force him to choose between loyalty to those family members and
loyalty to the United States.
In reaching my decision in this case, I have considered the factors set forth in Section E2.2
of the Directive. On balance, they do not help applicant. Applicant has lived in the United States for
many years, married a native-born American, and has worked and raised his two children here. These
are factors in his favor. However, he is still a Moroccan citizen,  which leaves him connected to, and1
is some respects obligated to, Morocco.  He voluntarily maintains close and regular contact with his2
immediate family members in Morocco, one of whom is a high-ranking Moroccan official. This
close contact includes trips to Morocco every two to three years. These trips significantly increase
his vulnerability to foreign influence, particularly since he is a citizen of Morocco.   In view of the3
foregoing, Guideline B is found against applicant.
4
FORMAL FINDINGS
GUIDELINE B: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant.
Joseph Testan
Administrative Judge
