KEYWORD: Drugs
DIGEST: Security concerns are raised pertaining to Applicant's history of drug abuse to include
marijuana, heroin, crystal methamphetamine, cocaine, and ecstacy.  In 2003, she attended inpatient
treatment and received a diagnosis of opioid dependence, cannabis dependence, and sedative abuse.
She has not met her burden to mitigate the concerns raised under drug involvement. Clearance is
denied.
CASENO: 06-21821.h1
DATE: 05/07/2007
DATE:  May 7, 2007
In re:
------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No.06-21821
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ERIN C. HOGAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Security concerns are raised pertaining to Applicant's history of drug abuse to include
marijuana, heroin, crystal methamphetamine, cocaine, and ecstacy.  In 2003, she attended inpatient
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2,1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
 Item 5.2
 Item 4.3
2
treatment and received a diagnosis of opioid dependence, cannabis dependence, and sedative abuse.
She has not met her burden to mitigate the concerns raised under drug involvement. Clearance is
denied.
STATEMENT OF CASE
On November 29, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) stating they were unable to find that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance.  The SOR, which is in essence1
the administrative complaint, alleges security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the
Department of Defense effective September 1, 2006. 
On December 26, 2006, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations.  Applicant elected to
have her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s file
of relevant material (FORM) on January 29, 2007. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on January
27, 2006, and received on February 4, 2007. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely responded.
Department Counsel had no objection. The case was assigned to me on February 22, 2007. 
On March 15, 2007, it was discovered that Applicant was not provided a copy of the revised
AG, effective September 1, 2006. On March 16, 2007, a copy of the revised AG was sent to
Applicant along with an order allowing her 30 days to review the revised AGs and to submit
additional comments or documents. On March 27, 2007, Applicant faxed in an acknowledgment that
she received the revised AG.  After 30 days of receipt, no additional documents were submitted.  
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 25-year-old office administrator employed with a defense contractor. She
submitted a security clearance application on October 20, 2005.   She admits to all of the allegations2
in the SOR with the qualification that her last drug use occurred in September 2003.3
Applicant has a history of illegal drug use.  Between February 2000 and September 2003, she
used heroin on a daily basis. She also purchased heroin. From May 2001 to September 2003, she
used marijuana on various occasions. During this time, she would purchase anywhere between $20
 Id.  4
 Item 6. 5
 Item 6 at 2, Discharge Diagnosis, dated October 13, 2003.6
 Response to FORM, undated but timely submitted. 7
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). 8
3
to $100 worth of marijuana on a weekly basis. In 2001, she used the following drugs on at least one
occasion: crystal methamphetamine, cocaine, ecstacy, and acid.4
On December 30, 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of Drug
Paraphernalia. She was found guilty and fined $222, placed on two years probation, and ordered to
attend mandatory drug classes.  
Between September 15, 2003, and October 2003, Applicant attended in-patient treatment at
a drug counseling facility.  She received a diagnosis of opioid dependence, cannabis dependence, and
sedative abuse.   She made excellent progress while in residential treatment. Part of her treatment5
plan was to continue out-patient treatment. After leaving residential treatment, she declined out-
patient treatment because she did not think she needed to continue treatment.  The drug counseling
facility unsuccessfully discharged Applicant because continued out-patient treatment was one of the
requirements for her to have successfully completed the program.6
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant indicates that she has abstained from alcohol and drugs
since completing the in-patient program. She no longer associates with her drug using friends. In her
response to the FORM, she indicated that she did not realize that she was unsuccessfully discharged
from the treatment program. She denied out-patient treatment when she went back to school and
work. She attended weekly Narcotics Anonymous meetings for six months after completion of in-
patient treatment. She no longer attends Narcotics Anonymous meetings due to the demands of the
college courses she takes.  She achieved a 3.93 Grade Point Average during the fall quarter 2006.7
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position …
that will give that person access to such information.”  In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding8
Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and
procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive branch. 
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security guidelines
contained in the Directive and the revised AGs, effective September 1, 2006.  The revised AGs set
forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.  The adjudicative guideline at issue in this case is: 
 Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 24. 9
 Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 2.10
 Id.11
 Id.12
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive ¶ E.2.2.2; Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 2(b).15
4
Guideline H - Drug Involvement:  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.9
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which could mitigate security concerns pertaining to this adjudicative guideline, is set forth and
discussed in the conclusions below.
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”   An administrative10
judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the available,
reliable information about the person.   An administrative judge should consider the following11
factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4)
the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7)
the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
(9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  12
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and
mitigating conditions under each guideline. Additionally, each security clearance decision must be
a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶ 6.3
of the Directive, and AG ¶ 2(a). 
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR
that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified
information.  Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain,13
extenuate, or mitigate the facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.14
“Any doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security
will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  15
 AG, ¶ 24(b).16
5
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special relationship with the
government.  The government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those
individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.  The decision to deny an individual
a security clearance is not a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is merely an indication
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for issuing a
clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards. The government
has established a prima facie case for disqualification under Guideline H.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
Applicant's past drug abuse raises a security concern. Drug abuse is defined as "the illegal use
of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction."  Between16
2000 to September 2003, Applicant used illegal drugs on a daily basis. The drug involvement security
concern is heightened further by her diagnosis during her September 2003 in-patient treatment of
opioid dependence, cannabis dependence, and sedative abuse.
The following Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions (DI DC) apply to Applicant's case.
DI DC ¶25(a) (any drug abuse) applies due to her past history of illegal drug use. DI DC ¶25 (c)
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia) applies.  Applicant possessed and purchased
illegal drugs on numerous occasions over a four year period. One can reasonably conclude that she
possessed drug paraphernalia as well based on her December 2002 arrest for drug paraphernalia and
subsequent conviction. 
DI DC ¶25(e) (evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social
worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program) cannot be applied.  While
Applicant was diagnosed as drug dependent during her in-patient treatment, the record is not clear
that the evaluation or diagnosis was made by a licensed clinical social worker.
DI DC ¶25(f) (failure to unsuccessfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by a
duly qualified medical professional) cannot be applied for the same reason that DI DC ¶25(e) cannot
be applied.  Although, the treatment facility concluded Applicant's discharge from the program was
unsuccessful, the record is not clear that treatment program was prescribed by "a duly qualified
medical professional." 
The drug involvement concern can be mitigated. However, I find none of the mitigating
conditions apply.  Applicant has an extensive history of illegal drug use. She was diagnosed as opioid
and cannabis dependent. Although she has indicated she does not intend to use illegal drugs in the
future, it is too soon to conclude that she will follow through on her  intentions. This conclusion is
based on Applicant's extent of illegal drug abuse; her refusal to attend out-patient treatment against
6
the recommendations of the treatment facility staff; and the fact that she does not attend support
groups which could assist her with staying drug free. Once the government establishes a prima facie
case to raise a security concern, Applicant has the burden to mitigate the security concern raised.
Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns.
I find against Applicant under Guideline H.
I considered all the evidence provided and also considered the “whole person” concept in
evaluating Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests. While it appears
Applicant made progress while attending in-patient treatment, a security concern remains due to her
failure to meet all of her aftercare requirements. She failed to mitigate the security concerns raised
by the drug involvement concern. Therefore, I am persuaded by the totality of the evidence in this
case, that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
Erin C. Hogan
Administrative Judge
