KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: In 2000, the Applicant had in excess of $40,000 of debts discharged by way of bankruptcy.
Since then, he has incurred over $19,000 in past due debts.  He avers that, with the aid of his
financial advisor fiancee, he will try to address these debts; but has only budgeted $200 each month
to this end, with little progress.  These Financial Considerations are still of security significance; and
as such, mitigation has not been shown.  Clearance in denied.
CASENO: 06-22186.h1
DATE: 05/03/2007
DATE: May 3, 2007
In Re:
--------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-22186
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
RICHARD A. CEFOLA
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
In 2000, the Applicant had in excess of $40,000 of debts discharged by way of bankruptcy.
Since then, he has incurred over $19,000 in past due debts.  He avers that, with the aid of his
financial advisor fiancee, he will try to address these debts; but has only budgeted $200 each month
to this end, with little progress.  These Financial Considerations are still of security significance; and
as such, mitigation has not been shown.  Clearance in denied.
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On December 27, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
Applicant filed an Answer to the SOR on January 22, 2007.
The case was originally assigned to another Administrative Judge.  A notice of hearing was
issued on February 27, 2007, for a March 22, 2007 hearing.  The case was reassigned to the
undersigned on March 6, 2007; and pursuant a request from the Applicant, was continued until April
16, 2007, when it was heard.  The Government submitted documentary evidence.  Testimony was
taken from the Applicant, who also submitted documentary evidence.  The transcript (TR) was
received on April 26, 2007.  The issue raised here is whether the Applicant's current Financial
Considerations militate against the granting of a security clearance.  [The Applicant admits the
underlying factual basis of all of the allegations.]
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the documents
and the live testimony.  The Applicant is 36 years of age, and is employed by a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance on behalf of the Applicant.  After a complete and thorough review
of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same, I make the following
additional Findings of Fact.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
1.a.  In 2000, the Applicant had in excess of $40,000 of debts discharged by way of a Chapter
7 Bankruptcy (TR at page 27 line 14 to page 34 line 5).  This bankruptcy was caused, for the most
part, by unexpected medical bills due to the birth of two premature children.  Since then, however,
he has incurred over $19,000 in past due debts (Government Exhibit (GX) 5).  He avers that, with
the aid of his financial advisor fiancee, he will try to address these debts, but has only budgeted $200
each month to this end (Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) A at enclosures 2, 3 and 5).
1.b. and 1.l.  The Applicant owes a credit card company about $1,189 in past due
indebtedness (GX 5 at page 1).  He has done little to address this debt (TR at page 38 line 25 to page
42 line 7, and at page 65 line 20 to page 66 line 18).
1.c.  The Applicant owes a finance company about $8,593 in past due indebtedness, for an
automobile that was repossessed (TR at page 42 lines 8~20).  He has done little to address this debt
(Id).
4
1.d.  The Applicant testified credibly that he has paid a $194 telephone bill (TR at page 42
lines 8~20).  This debt does not appear on the Applicant’s most recent February 2007 credit report.
1.e.  The Applicant has paid a $55 telephone bill to another phone provider (TR at page 43
line13 to page 44 line 24).  The Applicant is current with this phone provider (AppX A at enclosures
13 and 15).
1.f.  The Applicant owes another credit card company about $140 in past due indebtedness
(GX 5 at page 2).  He has done little to address this debt (TR at page 48 line 24 to page 49 line 20).
1.g.  The Applicant owes a sixth creditor about $262 in past due indebtedness (GX 5 at page
2).  He pleads ignorance as to this debt (TR at page 53 lines 1~11).
1.h.  The Applicant owes a credit union about $1,001 in past due indebtedness (GX 5 at page
2).  He has done little to address this debt (TR at page 53 line 12 to page 54 line 3).
1.i.  The Applicant owes a third credit card company about $3,539 in past due indebtedness.
He has done little to address this debt (TR at page 54 line 4 to page 57 line 20).
1.j. and 1.k.  The Applicant owes a bank about $4,402 in past due indebtedness on two
separate accounts (GX 5 at page 2).  He has done little to address these debts (TR at page 57 line 21
to page 59 line 15).
Mitigation
The Applicant and his fiancee aver that he hopes to address his debts in the future, and is
currently living within his means (AppX A at enclosures 2 and 3).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E2.2. of the 1992 Directive set forth both policy factors and
conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern, and which must be given binding
consideration in making security clearance determinations.  The conditions should be followed in
every case according to the pertinent criterion, however, the conditions are neither automatically
determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative Judge's reliance
on his own common sense.  Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it should not be assumed that these conditions exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every case. 
As set forth in the Directive, each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common
sense determination based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information and the
pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in enclosure 2, including as appropriate:
a. Nature, extent, seriousness of the conduct, and surrounding
circumstances.
5
b. Frequency and recency of the conduct.
c. Age and maturity of the applicant.
d. Motivation of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct
was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken with knowledge of
the consequence involved.
e. Absence or presence of rehabilitation.
f. Probability that circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in
the future.
The Administrative Judge, however, can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have
a reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.
The Government must make out a case under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) which
establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational
connection, or nexus, must be shown between an applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to
effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational
connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in refutation,
explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past adverse conduct is unlikely
to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts
to generate funds.  The Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security
clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
The Applicant has in excess of $19,000 in past due indebtedness, dating back to his 2000
bankruptcy.  The first and third disqualifying conditions are therefore applicable in this case, as there
is a “history of not meeting financial obligations,” and an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts.”  I can find no countervailing mitigating conditions, as the Applicant has done little to address
the vast majority of his past due debts.  He and his fiancee aver to his future intentions, but this is
too little too late.  Guideline F is therefore found against the Applicant.
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not rebutted the Government's case regarding
his Financial Considerations.  The Applicant has thus not met the mitigating conditions of Guideline
F, and of Section E2.2. of the Directive.  Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of
persuasion under Guideline F.
FORMAL FINDINGS
6
Formal Findings required by paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
a. Against the Applicant.
b. Against the Applicant.
c. Against the Applicant.
d. For the Applicant.
e. For the Applicant.
f. Against the Applicant.
g. Against the Applicant.
h. Against the Applicant.
i. Against the Applicant.
j. Against the Applicant.
k. Against the Applicant.
l. Against the Applicant.
Factual support and reasons for the foregoing are set forth in FINDINGS OF FACT and
CONCLUSIONS, supra.
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
