KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant possessed private firearms in violation of a general order while in Iraq.  He
was involved in an incident in which two Iraqi nationals were shot.  The Judge considered
Applicant’s military career but concluded that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of
persuasion.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-03828.a1
DATE: 04/29/2010
DATE: April 29, 2010
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-03828
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
2
clearance.  On April 9, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 22, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Michael H.
Leonard denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to
the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: After retiring
from a 30-year career as an active duty military member, Applicant obtained employment with a
defense contractor.  He worked in Iraq from 2005 to 2006.  While there, he came into possession of
two nine-millimeter pistols.  He did not purchase the firearms, but obtained them from an unknown
member of the U.S. military.  Applicant’s possession of the firearms was wrongful because
possession of privately-owned firearms was a prohibited activity in violation of a general order,
which applied to Applicant in his capacity as a civilian serving with the U.S. armed forces while
under the operational control of the military command in Iraq.  While in Iraq, Applicant was
involved in an incident while off-duty where he shot two Iraqi nationals with one of his weapons.
Applicant and others in his party were approached by two Iraqis, one of whom displayed a pistol,
and proceeded to pull back the pistol’s slide and release it.  Applicant then withdrew his pistol and
shot the armed Iraqi and then turned and shot the other Iraqi, who was able to flee on foot.  Applicant
and his companions left the scene and returned to the U.S. embassy compound, where they went their
separate ways.  Applicant did not report the shooting to any civilian or military authority at the
embassy.
Applicant claims he reported the shooting to some Marines the next day at his workplace,
but he was unable to provide any corroborating information on that point.  Some months later, while
on a trip back to the U.S. to attend to some personal business, Applicant recounted the shooting
incident informally to a fellow employee while at his company’s headquarters.  The information was
passed along to the company’s management officials, who held a meeting with Applicant about the
incident.  The company concluded that Applicant had been forthright and cooperative during the
interview.  The company placed Applicant on administrative leave with pay, and subsequently told
him he was being laid off.  He was given 30 days severance pay.  Applicant was subsequently
interviewed by other government agencies and gave detailed accounts of the shooting incident,
maintaining that he acted in self-defense.  During the course of these interviews, Applicant indicated
that he did not notify anyone the night of the shooting because “nobody wanted to get anyone else
in trouble.”  Applicant also stated that if he thought he had committed a crime then he would have
reported it, but he didn’t think he had committed a crime.
The Judge concluded that, with regard to the possession of firearms, Applicant knew, or
should have known, that his actions were unlawful.  The Judge concluded that it was difficult to
believe that Applicant was not briefed on the prohibited activities listed in the general order.  The
3
Judge also concluded that Applicant willfully withheld information about the serious shooting
incident, despite numerous opportunities to report it.  The Judge concluded that given his
background and experience, Applicant knew or should have known a full report to his employer or
an appropriate U.S. authority was required for such a serious incident.  Applicant elected not to take
action (other than the unofficial action of mentioning it to some of the Marines he worked with)
because he was concerned about the potential for negative consequences to himself and others
involved.  The Judge concluded that, taken together, Applicant’s conduct amounts to inappropriate
workplace behavior that calls into question Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
The Judge stated that he gave due consideration to Applicant’s military career and civilian service
in light of the whole-person concept, but any credit due him is not enough to overcome the security
concerns.       
Applicant asserts that the Judge’s decision is not supported by the evidence.  He points out
that he had an exemplary military career without a blemish on his record.  Applicant also contends
that he was not aware of the general order or its contents, and he had not been briefed concerning
the issue of privately-owned firearms.  He claims that he did not intentionally disregard any order
and it was common knowledge and practice that contractor employees were carrying weapons in
order to protect themselves.  Regarding the shooting incident, Applicant asserts that the only way
the government has any information regarding the shooting incident is from himself.  Applicant
states that he did, in fact, report the incident in a timely manner and to appropriate authorities, and
at no time did he intentionally withhold any information concerning the incident.  Applicant’s
arguments do not establish error.
After a review of the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s conclusions are
sustainable.  Applicant testified that he was aware of the general order and knew that his employer
did not favor private possession of handguns in Applicant’s duty area in Iraq.  These facts undercut
Applicant’s assertion that his possession of the handguns was innocent and reasonably support the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s actions constituted lack of judgment. Likewise, the Judge’s
conclusions that Applicant did not properly inform the authorities through official channels about
his involvement in the shooting of two Iraqi civilians and that his failure to do so constituted poor
judgment and lack of trustworthiness are also supported by the record.
 
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007). 
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He discussed the applicability of the mitigating factors listed under Guideline
E, but indicated why those mitigating conditions could not be invoked in this case to alleviate the
government’s security concerns.   
4
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett           
   Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
