1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-14127
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Robert Bohn, Esquire
April 14, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP), on October 9, 2006.  On February 27, 2009, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guidelines E and J for the Applicant.  The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
The Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 20, 2009.  He
answered the SOR in writing through counsel the same day, March 20, 2009, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on
March 23, 2009, and the case was assigned to another Judge on October 27, 2009.
The case was reassigned to the undersigned on January 11, 2010.  DOHA had already
2
issued a notice of hearing on December 14, 2009, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on February 2, 2010.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 7,
which were received without objection by way of stipulation.  The Applicant testified on
his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through Q, which were also received
without objection by way of stipulation.  The Applicant further offered AppX R, which
was not part of the stipulation, and was received without objection.  DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 17, 2010.  The record closed on February 2,
2010, the date of the hearing.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, the Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Paragraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h of the SOR, with explanations.  He denied
the factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.c, 1.f, 1.i, and 2.a of the SOR.  He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Personal Conduct & Criminal Conduct
The Applicant is a 55 year old “Chief Scientist” with an aerospace company.  (Tr
at page 4 line 16 to page 5 line 2, at page 15 line 14 to page 28 line 4, and at page 31
line 7 to page 32 line 9.)  The Appellant has held a security clearance since 1978,
without any reported incidents regarding his protection of classified materials.  (Id, GX 3
at page 7, and AppXs A~L and R.)
1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, 1.h, and 2.a.  The Applicant used and purchased numerous
illegal substances from about 1975, while he was attending college, until his last usage
sometime in 1992, about 18 years ago.  (TR at page 32 line 18 to page 36 line 8.)
Specifically, he used and purchased marijuana during this entire period, with his
heaviest usage being about “once a week” in the “mid-1980's.”  (Id.)  He also used
marijuana “once or twice,” during his lunch breaks in about 1985.  (TR at page 35 line
15 to page 36 line 12.)  He used and purchased cocaine from about 1980 to 1990,
about “once a month.  On average.”  (TR at page 37 line 12 to page 39 line 7.)  He used
and purchased hallucinogenic mushrooms, about “three times . . . early 80's, about 81
or so.”  (TR at page 41 lines 5~24.)  He used quaaludes “once . . . about 1983.”  (TR at
page 40 lines 3~20.)  He also used LSD once in about 1985.  (GX 5 at page 5.)  Finally,
in 1982, he misused Tylenol with Codeine, which was prescribed to the Applicant who
“was recovering from knee surgery,” by taking a double dose to address his pain.  (TR
at page 42 lines 5~22.)
The Applicant executed a Personnel Security Questionnaire (PSQ) in July of
1995.  (GX 4.)  In answer to questions 22.a., 22.b., and 22.c., the Applicant admittedly
failed to disclose his past drug usage, purchases, and his one time misuse of Tylenol,
as described, above.  (TR at page 45 line 8 to page 49 line 11, and GX 4 at page 4.)
These omissions, back in 1995, were a violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001.
3
1.d, and 2.a  In a September of 1995 follow up interview with an authorized
investigator, the Applicant noted no omissions or errors on his 1995 PSQ, thus
admittedly failing to disclose his past drug abuse.  (TR at page 50 lines 2~25.)  This
omission was a violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001.
1.e, and 2.a  The Applicant executed a Security Clearance Application (SCA) in
May of 2001.  (GX 4.)  In answer to question 28, the Applicant admittedly failed to
disclose his past use of illegal drugs and drug activity while holding a security clearance,
as described above.  (TR at page 51 line 2 to page 52 line 12, and GX 3 at page 6.)
This omission, back in 2001, was a violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001.
1.f, and 2.a  In a 2001 follow up interview with an authorized investigator, the
Applicant noted no omissions or errors on his 2001 SCA, thus admittedly failing to
disclose his past drug abuse.  (TR at page 52 line 13 to page 53 line 23.)  This omission
was a violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001.
“In 2005, . . . [the Applicant] had a Special Access Clearance, and . . . had been
called in for a polygraph exam.”  (TR at page 54 lines 3~16.)  He was then given “a pre-
poly interview.”  (Id.)  This was not the Applicant’s first polygraph examination, as he
had “had other polygraph tests” in the past.  (TR at page 78 lines 9~19.)  It was during
this interview that the Applicant first disclosed his past drug abuse.  (Id.).  During the
Department Counsel’s colloquy with the Applicant, the following evidence was elicited:
Q[uestion] In fact, he, in the pre-polygraph, asked you have you used
drugs?
A[nswer] Yes.
Q So, you knew that was going to be a question on the
polygraph examination?
A No.  That was not one of the questions on the polygraph
examination.
Q It didn’t turn out to be.  But, when they asked you that pre-
question, let’s be honest, you probably had a good suspicion that he was
going to ask you that or he could have asked that?
A He could have asked me that.
Q Okay.  So, it wasn’t like you had an epiphany and wanted to
come clean.  You basically, stated something that you probably thought
was going to come out anyway?
4
A Well, before I went in, I wanted to be totally honest, you
know.  Of course, [I] wanted to pass the poly and you have to be honest.
So I had already made up my mind.
Q You knew you had to be honest about your drug use now.
A Well, I mean I wanted to be [as] honest as I could be.  I
wanted to be forthcoming and answer every question as honestly as
I could.  (TR at page 78 line 25 to page 80 line 4, emphasis supplied.)
I find that the Applicant’s disclosure of his past drug abuse was sua sponte.
In June of 2006, the Applicant executed another SCA.  (GX 1).  In answer to
question 28., the Applicant disclosed his past use of illegal drugs and drug activity while
holding a security clearance.  (GX 1 at pages 6~7.)  During the Department Counsel’s
colloquy with the Applicant, the following evidence was elicited as to this disclosure:
Q Truth of the matter is there really is no evidence that if you
didn’t have to take the polygraph in 2006(sic), that you would have ever
come clean.
A I think that when it came time to fill out my 2006 SF-86, I put
everything down there.  I had my Clearances.  The Investigators at the
time kind of led me to believe that there was not going to be any issue with
my Security Clearance.
Q When did you fill out that 2006 Security Clearance
[Application]?
A June of 06.
Q Okay.  When did you take the polygraph?
A Probably the year before in the fall.
Q So, the truth of the matter is you had to put it on your 2006
Security Clearance Application because you already admitted it to the
polygraph examiner.
A No, not necessarily, because they’re two different
organizations that typically don’t communicate with each other.  [The
2005 polygraph was taken for SCI access.  The 2006 SCA was filled out
for a security clearance.]  (TR at page 81 line 9 to page 82 line 10,
emphasis supplied.)
5
In October of 2006, the Applicant executed an e-QIP.  (GX 2).  In answer to
question 24.b., the Applicant disclosed his past use of illegal drugs and drug activity
while holding a security clearance.  (GX 2 at page 27.)
1.i.  The Applicant has cross-dressed from about 1972 until about “three or four
years ago.”  (TR at page 64 line 4 to page 67 line 1, and at page 67 line 19 to page 69
line 17.)  The Applicant’s wife is aware of this activity, which occurs in the privacy of
their home (Id.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
6
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . or similar form . . .” may be disqualifying.
Under Subparagraph 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an . . . investigator, security official, . . . or other
government representative” may also be disqualifying.  Here, the Applicant falsified his
1995 PSQ and his 2001 SCA.  He was also less than candid with the Government in
two interviews, again in 1995 and in 2001.  He did not disclose his past drug
involvement.  These are countered, however, Subparagraph 17(c) as “so much time has
passed . . . that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement.”  The Applicant’s last falsification was
nearly ten years ago.  Since then, the Applicant has repeatedly and willingly disclosed
all of his past drug abuse, that occurred about 18 years ago.  Furthermore, those who
know the Applicant in the work place do not question his integrity and personal conduct.
(AppXs A~D, and R).
It is alleged and admitted that the Applicant is a cross dresser.  Arguably, the
disqualifying condition noted in Subparagraph 16(e) is applicable; i.e., “personal
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress . . . .”  This is clearly countered, however, by
Subparagraph 17(e) as the Applicant “has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  Here, the Applicant last cross
dressed three or four years ago, in the privacy of his home, and his wife knows about it.
7
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
Paragraph 30 of the new adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern
relating to Criminal Conduct:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The adjudicative guidelines set out certain conditions that could raise security
concerns.  Paragraph 31(c) provides that an “allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted,@ may raise security concerns.  The Applicant’s falsifications in 1995 and
again in 2001 were violations of 18 U.S.C. 1001.  Here, this is clearly countered by
Subparagraph 32(a) as “so much time has elapsed since the criminal happened . . . that
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  Again, his last falsification occurred ten years ago.
Since then, the Applicant has repeatedly and willingly disclosed all of his past drug
abuse.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.  The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a):
“ (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The Applicant has the unqualified support
of those who know him in the work place (AppXs A~D, and R).  The record evidence
leaves me with no questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the
security concerns arising from his Personal Conduct and related Criminal Conduct. 
8
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
