KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s challenged findings are based on substantial evidence.  Substantial
evidence is such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.  Adverse decision affirmed,
CASENO: 08-08823.a1
DATE: 04/21/2010
DATE: April 21, 2010
In Re:
-----
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-08823
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq, Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Daniel C. Minutillo, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 23, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline
2
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 8, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative
Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact were
supported by substantial record evidence; whether the Judge mis-weighed the evidence; and whether
the Judge erred in his application of the pertinent mitigating conditions.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a quality engineer for
a Defense contractor.  She immigrated to the U.S. and became a naturalized citizen.  She obtained
a degree in computer science from a U.S. university.  She is married and has two children.
In the mid-2000s Applicant was working for her current employer, though in a different state
from her current place of employment.  She became friendly with a male colleague, A, and the
relationship between the two became a social one.  Applicant and her husband regularly invited A
to their home, and A would give gifts to Applicant’s children at holiday time and on birthdays.
Applicant and A’s relationship developed, and they would attend events such as concerts
together, without the knowledge of A’s husband.  Once, they traveled to the west coast for a
shopping trip without A’s husband knowing about it.  A began to make sexual advances upon
Applicant and started calling her names, such as “Babe.”  Some of this took place in the workplace,
and Applicant filed sexual harassment charges against A.
In December 2005 A asked Applicant if she would come by his residence to pick up presents
for Applicant’s children.  When she did, Applicant and A had sexual relations.  Later, Applicant
reported the incident as rape, claiming that A pushed himself on her.  However, subsequent
investigation led authorities to the conclusion that rape did not occur, finding A’s account of
consensual relations to be more credible.  Applicant ultimately pled guilty to false reporting, a
misdemeanor.  The Judge found that, in light of the totality of the record evidence, Applicant had
falsely reported the rape.
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of her work performance, her
conscientiousness, trustworthiness, and dependability.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that she falsely reported the rape, claiming that she
pled guilty only to avoid the stress of litigation.  We have examined the record evidence, including
the police report which the Judge considered in arriving at his finding of false reporting.  The report
is detailed and internally consistent.  Its credibility was not seriously impugned at the hearing.  We
have also examined Applicant’s testimony at the hearing.  We conclude that the Judge’s findings are
based upon substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record.”)  
3
Although Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly weigh the evidence, we find no
reason to disturb the manner in which he evaluated the evidence and judged the credibility of
Applicant’s testimony.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an
ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-21819 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 13, 2009).  
Applicant notes that the Judge’s statement, contained in the Findings portion of the decision,
that “[b]ecause Applicant declined to elaborate on the circumstances surrounding her reported
account of the incident when pressed by the [police] and [the OPM investigator] . . . all of the
circumstances surrounding the . . .  incident may never be fully revealed.”  Decision at 5.  Applicant
contends that the Judge should have resolved these ambiguities in favor of Applicant.  However, in
cases brought under the Directive, once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.
See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).th
After the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant
to rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard governing security
clearance adjudications is in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”)  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive ¶ E2.2(b).
Accordingly, we find no error in the challenged statement.    
We have examined the Judge’s decision, both as to its application of the mitigating
conditions and the whole-person factors.  We conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record. 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael D. Hipple            
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
4
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
