 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07323 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 14, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Security concerns are raised under the guidelines for Alcohol Consumption and 
Personal Conduct. The allegations pertain to Applicant's history of alcohol abuse over 
25 years and poor judgment with respect to illegal drug use while holding a security 
clearance, solicitation of prostitutes, a robbery in which Applicant was the victim, and a 
workplace sexual encounter in a secured area. He has not met his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns raised under Alcohol Consumption and Personal Conduct. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines G, Alcohol Consumption, and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 23, 2009, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on January 25, 2010. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on February 11, 2010. He 
was afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. As of March 26, 2010, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on March 30, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the conduct alleged in SOR 
¶¶1.a-1.c, 2.a, 2.d-2.g. He denied ¶ 2.b. On ¶ 2.c, he indicated “I neither admit or deny, 
see past statement.” Applicant’s response to ¶ 2.c. will be treated as a denial. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and through 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He holds a master’s 
degree in mechanical engineering. He has never been married and has no children. He 
has worked in the defense industry since 1983. He held a security clearance from 1983 
through 2006, when his top secret sensitive compartmented access was revoked due to 
excessive Alcohol Consumption and Personal Conduct, set out below. (Item 4; Item 5 at 
I-6, I-38, I-46.) 
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse. He was arrested in 1981 for driving 
under the influence of alcohol (DUI). He was placed on probation for six months for this 
offense. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted consuming alcohol in excess and 
to the point of intoxication over a 27-year period, extending until at least 2008. 
Additionally, alcohol was a factor in some of the instances discussed below. 
 
 During the time Applicant possessed a security clearance, he engaged in a 
number of questionable activities. In approximately April 1984 through June 1985, 
Applicant used both marijuana and cocaine on six occasions. He indicated he used 
cocaine and marijuana infrequently “for a short duration after I left the university while 
employed.” Applicant again used an illegal substance, hashish, in November 2001. In a 
letter dated January 19, 2005, Applicant recounted an incident involving hashish to his 
security office. He indicated that while vacationing in South America, he was offered a 
home-made cigarette from a “European.” Applicant inhaled from the lit cigarette and “I 
noticed the tobacco had been most likely laced with a narcotic, which I inadvertently 
inhaled.” Applicant continued, “At that point I used poor judgment (likely due to being 
intoxicated), and I did take a few more puffs.” Applicant was drinking alcohol and was 
intoxicated on this occasion. (Item 4 at 29-30; Item 5 at I-11, I-23, I-30, I-47.) 
 
 In addition to Applicant’s drug use, he has solicited prostitutes on two occasions. 
In 1995, Applicant solicited the services of a female foreign national while vacationing 
 
3 
 
outside of the United States. Applicant met the prostitute at a nightclub and paid her 
$100. In 2003, he solicited the services of a prostitute while in Las Vegas, Nevada. He 
was intoxicated on both occasions. (Item 5 at I-12, I-21, I-25, I-28, I-48.) 
 
 Similarly, Applicant’s alcohol use led to another precarious situation. In 2004, 
while vacationing in another South American country, Applicant went to a local bar close 
to his hotel. Prior to going out, he consumed a bottle of wine and two mixed drinks. 
During the course of the evening, he met two foreign females. They sat together and 
Applicant consumed several more beers. Applicant believes that one of the females 
“spiked” his beer with some type of knockout drug and later sprinkled the same drug 
onto his french-fries. After eating the fries, he felt strangely. The females brought 
Applicant to his hotel room. He remembers undressing and showering with one of the 
females. The next morning, he woke late and discovered he had been robbed of his 
valuables. In a separate account, Applicant claimed the entire robbery took place within 
20 minutes. (Item 5 at I-9, I-11, I-21, I-24, I-25, I-28, I-47; Item 6 at I-72, I-75.) 
 
 Applicant also disclosed that he had sex with his former girlfriend in his office 
located inside a secure area, presumable while holding a clearance. The encounter 
occurred during normal working hours. She was a cleared employee, although it is not 
clear from the record if she had access to the secured area. (Item 5 at I-6, I-12, I-48.) 
 
  At the height of Applicant’s alcohol consumption in approximately late 2005 to 
early 2006, he was consuming one pint of hard alcohol nightly, on weekdays. On 
weekends, he usually consumed even more alcohol, and became intoxicated. He 
claimed that he drank in order to sleep. He typically would consume alcohol at home, 
alone, in order to avoid trouble, although he admitted to drinking and driving 
approximately twice a year, without detection by authorities. Applicant attributed his 
highest levels of alcohol consumption to the deteriorating health and subsequent 
passing of close family members. After the revocation of his security clearance in 2006, 
Applicant sought alcohol counseling through his employee assistance program. He met 
with a psychologist approximately eight times between August 1, 2006 and March 3, 
2007. Applicant terminated treatment when he felt he had his alcohol use under control. 
The Government presented Applicant’s records of treatment obtained from his 
psychologist, but the records contained no decipherable diagnosis. In a September 19, 
2008 letter, Applicant contended he “refrain[ed] from hard alcohol consumption and 
radically chang[ed] the amount and patterns of alcohol consumption in general” but he 
continued to consumed beer and wine in moderation. However he failed to provide any 
information about his current, 2010, levels of alcohol consumption. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 
5 at I-1, I-10, I-12, I-14, I-22-24, I-29, I-46-47, I-50; Item 6 at I-72, I-76; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant presented no letters of support. Records indicate that he had two 
security clearance violations during the period he possessed a clearance, including 
bring home a classified document and inadvertent disclosure of classified information. 
(Item 5 at I-I49.) 
    
  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. (AG.) In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for Alcohol Consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 Applicant has been involved in several incidents away from work in which alcohol 
played a role. Clearly, his 1981 DUI conviction, along with his admission of continuing to 
drive after becoming intoxicated approximately twice a year, raises security concerns. In 
addition, he repeatedly found himself in precarious situations, due to his alcohol abuse 
and poor judgment while consuming alcohol. His use of poor judgment while under the 
influence of alcohol away from work is disqualifying under AG ¶ 22 (a). 
 
 Additionally, Applicant engaged in a pattern of habitually consuming alcohol to 
the point of intoxication over a 27-year period. It is clear from Applicant’s admissions 
and medical record that his alcohol consumption has been excessive. Disqualifying AG 
¶ 22 (c) applies. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 23, the following mitigating factors are potentially relevant:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant’s habitual consumption of alcohol was recent, frequent, likely to 
reoccur, and casts doubt on his judgment. Over half of his life, Applicant has engaged in 
excessive alcohol use. While Applicant indicated that he significantly curtailed his 
alcohol use in 2006 to 2008, with no reported incidents in the subsequent two to four 
years, in this instance, I cannot find that “a significant period of time has passed without 
any evidence of misconduct,” in light of his long history with alcohol. ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4 2004). Additionally, there is no credible record evidence 
that reflects Applicant’s current level of alcohol consumption has declined, other than 
his 2008 self-serving statement that he consumes beer and wine in moderation. 
Applicant’s alcohol related incidents cast serious doubt on his judgment. He has chosen 
to make poor choices while intoxicated including several instances of driving drunk. AG 
¶ 23(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has, in part, acknowledged his alcohol abuse and sought treatment to 
overcome his alcohol problem. However, Applicant has failed to demonstrate 
responsible use or abstinence. Applicant may have ceased consuming hard alcohol in 
2006, but he continued to consume beer and wine. Additionally, he provided no updated 
record to show his current level of consumption. Therefore, AG ¶ 23(b) is not applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply because Applicant made no claim that he is currently 
participating in counseling or a treatment program. Applicant has the burden to present 
evidence to support the mitigating condition and he failed to offer any evidence in 
support. ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
The record is devoid of evidence that would allow for the applicability of AG ¶ 
23(d). While Applicant participated in alcohol counseling from August 1, 2006, to March 
3, 2007, the records offered by the Government provided no indication that Applicant 
successfully completed his treatment and contained no clear diagnosis or prognosis. 
Further, Applicant terminated treatment when he decided his problem was under 
control. He provided no evidence to suggest that his psychologist agreed with his 
decision. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 In addition to Applicant’s alcohol problem, he has made a number of decisions 
that reflect poorly on his character. Applicant exercised questionable judgment when he 
used illegal substances while holding a clearance in 1984-1985 and again in 2001, 
when he engaged the services of prostitutes in 1995 and 2003, and when he had sexual 
relations during business hours in his secured-area office with his former girlfriend. 
Applicant’s history of irresponsible behavior and questionable judgment makes him 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. His irresponsibility has made him a 
target for robbery in the past, and without corrective action, leaves him vulnerable in the 
future. AG ¶ 16(c) and ¶ 16(d) apply. 
 
Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating factors are potentially relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
8 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s lapses in judgment were all serious and significant instances that 
occurred over a long period of time. Each indiscretion casts doubt on his reliability and 
trustworthiness. Taken together they show a pattern of inappropriate behavior 
demonstrating questionable judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness indicating he 
may not safeguard properly protected information. Additionally, not enough time has 
passed to establish that Applicant will refrain from his 27-year pattern of poor decision 
making. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has acknowledged that he has made poor choices in the past, but has 
not demonstrated any positive steps to change his behavior, other than his brief alcohol 
treatment. The alcohol treatment is not mitigating because he did not present evidence 
that he successfully completed treatment and he continues to consume wine and beer. 
Further, not all of the incidents of poor judgment involved alcohol. There was no alcohol 
use indicated in Applicant’s sexual encounter with his then girlfriend in his office. AG ¶ 
17(d) does not apply. 
 
 Likewise, AG ¶ 17(e) is inapplicable. Applicant contended that he took positive 
steps to reduce his alcohol consumption from 2006-2008. However, we don’t know what 
level he actually reduced it to, nor does the record reflect what his current level of 
alcohol consumption is. Further, as noted above, alcohol was certainly a contributing 
factor in most instances of poor judgment, but not all instances. Applicant failed to show 
how he had reduced or eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
9 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but warrant additional comment. Applicant 
offered no letters in support of his application. He is an educated and mature man who 
has worked in the defense industry for 27 years. He has had two security clearance 
violations. 
 
Although Applicant had been entrusted with a high level security clearance, his 
behavior from 1983 through 2006 reflected a disregard for the high standards that 
comes with the responsibility of holding a security clearance. He chose to engage in 
drug use, solicit prostitutes, disrespect his workplace (by having sexual relations in his 
office amidst classified materials), and consume great quantities of alcohol. He has 
offered little evidence to suggest that he now takes the responsibilities of holding a 
security clearance seriously. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Alcohol Consumption and Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-c.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
