1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01642
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Although Applicant has made progress in getting her delinquent debts under
control, it is too soon to conclude they no longer pose a security concern considering
their recurrent nature and the amount remaining to be satisfied. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On August 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
ISCR Case No. 01-17051 (December 6, 2002).1
ISCR Case No. 03-07826 (App. Bd. June 17, 2005 at 3).2
2
Applicant answered the SOR on September 14, 2009, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2009. On December 7, 2009, a notice of
hearing was issued scheduling the case for January 6, 2010. That day, Applicant
asserted she did not receive the government’s proposed exhibits before the hearing,
and moved for a continuance. Department Counsel did not object, and I granted the
motion, rescheduling the case for January 21, 2010. The case was held as rescheduled.
At the hearing, I received eight government exhibits, fourteen Applicant exhibits, and the
testimony of Applicant. Also, at Department Counsel’s request, I took administrative
notice of the decision and the SOR in Applicant’s previous ISCR case (Hearing Exhibits
(HE) I and II).  The transcript was received on January 28, 2010.1
Procedural Ruling
SOR subparagraph 1.v alleges that Applicant is “indebted to a Medical account
that has been placed for collection in the approximate amount of $2,737.” Applicant
denied it. This allegation is overbroad because it does not identify a specific creditor.
Although an SOR does not have to satisfy the strict requirements of a criminal
indictment, it must still place an applicant on adequate notice of the allegations so that
she may have a reasonable opportunity to respond and prepare a defense.2
Subparagraph 1.v does not meet this minimum threshold, therefore, I conclude that it is
not justiciable, and resolve it in Applicant’s favor.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old widow with three children, ages 22, 19, and 11 (Tr. 23).
She has a high school diploma and has earned approximately two and a half years of
college credits (Tr. 24). She works for a defense contractor in the information
technology field (Tr. 28). She has worked for the same employer for five years (Tr. 26).
Applicant first experienced financial difficulties after her husband’s death in 1997.
By 2002, she had accrued approximately $11,000 of delinquent debt, prompting DOHA
to issue an SOR later that year (HE II). Based in part on her promises to satisfy all of
her debts by the end of 2003, the administrative judge granted her a clearance (HE 1 at
2 ¶ 2).
In April 2004, Applicant lost her job and was unemployed for the next seven
months (GE 1 at 19). Her bills again became delinquent. In September 2004, Applicant
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection (Answer). The petition listed approximately
$57,900 of debt, including two debts Applicant had promised to pay by the end of 2003,
during the earlier security clearance investigation, (HE 1 at 2).
3
Applicant did not consistently make the monthly payments to the bankruptcy
trustee (Tr. 29). Consequently, the court dismissed the bankruptcy approximately two
months later (Answer at 1). 
By March 2009, Applicant had accrued approximately $130,000 of delinquent
debt. SOR subparagraphs 1.b and 1.e are utility bills totalling $730. Applicant satisfied
them (GE D and F, respectively). SOR subparagraph 1.r is a credit card with a $317
balance. Applicant satisfied this debt, also (GE J). 
The creditor listed in SOR subparagraph 1.s is a credit union loan for an
automobile purchase in 1999 (GE 7 at 28). In 2006, the car was stolen, and a $6,900
balance was owed (Tr. 37; GE K at 2). It is unclear from the record why Applicant still
owed a balance after seven years. Nevertheless, her insurance company paid the
creditor the remaining balance in March 2007 (AE K at 2).
Applicant did not recognize the debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.w. She
contacted the creditor and successfully disputed it (Tr. 40). Consequently, the credit
reporting agencies removed it from her credit reports.
The remainder of the SOR debts, totalling approximately $111,000, are student
loans. The debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d, totalling approximately
$21,000, are owed to the same creditor. Applicant consolidated them and arranged a
payment plan (Answer at 7). She contends she has been paying $95 monthly under the
plan, but only provided evidence supporting one payment in June 2009 and another in
December 2009 (GE E, Answer at 7).
Applicant consolidated the debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.f through 1.n.
The total amount due currently is approximately $43,000 (Tr. 34; GE G). Applicant
contends she arranged a payment plan under which she has been paying $50 monthly
since March 2009 (Tr. 34). Applicant only provided a one receipt, dated December 2,
2009, that demonstrates she has been making any payments (GE G).
SOR subparagraph 1.o totals approximately $4,900. Applicant settled this
account in February 2009 (AE H at 2).
SOR subparagraphs 1.p, 1.q, and 1.x total approximately $10,500. Applicant
initiated a payment plan in June 2009 with a $245 payment (GE I). Under the plan, she
is to pay $70 each month (Tr. 35). She made a payment in December 2009 (GE I at 2).
The evidence does not establish whether she made any payments between the June
2009 and December 2009.
The debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.t is approximately $9,258. On January
13, 2010, Applicant filed a “Request for Forbearance” with the creditor (AE L at 4). Her
request is pending (AE A). Applicant’s monthly payments in the amount of $69 were
scheduled to begin in February 2010 (Id. at 1).
4
SOR subparagraph 1.u is a student loan from a university Applicant attended in
2004 (Tr. 39, 82). The balance is approximately $1,350. Applicant wrote the creditor on
January 6, 2010 proposing to pay $25 monthly through a payment plan (AE M).
SOR subparagraphs 1.y through 1.gg, totalling approximately $39,000, are owed
to the same creditor. Although the creditor’s account information indicates the debt is
satisfied, Applicant never made payments, and does not “know if [these debts were]
bought by one of the other companies or if [they were] paid through some of the grants”
she had applied for over the years (Tr. 91). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Applicant’s history of financial delinquencies triggers the application of AG ¶¶
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
5
Applicant successfully disputed the debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.w.
Consequently, I resolve it in her favor.
Applicant’s first episode of financial difficulties occurred after her husband’s
death in the late 1990s, and her second episode occurred after a lengthy period of
unemployment in 2004. Since then, Applicant has contacted creditors, arranged
payment plans, successfully disputed one account, as referenced above, and satisfied
several others. Consequently, AG ¶¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” and 20(d), “the individual initiated
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” apply. 
Applicant deserves credit for either satisfying or successfully removing
approximately $50,000 of debt from the SOR. However, she has yet to begin resolving
accounts totalling approximately $10,500, and provided insufficient evidence that she
has been making consistent, monthly payments toward the satisfaction of the
consolidated student loan accounts totalling approximately $74,500. Under these
circumstances, AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control,” is inapplicable.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant has made significant progress towards resolving her delinquent debts.
However, approximately $86,000 of delinquent debt remains outstanding. She has yet
to begin making payments on two of these accounts totalling $10,500, and she failed to
establish that she has been making consistent payments toward the satisfaction of the
remainder. Moreover, although Applicant’s delinquencies accrued largely because of a
lengthy unemployment beginning in 2004, two of them preceded the unemployment and
were at issue during an earlier ISCR case. Applicant failed to fulfill a promise, made at
that time, to pay those two delinquencies by the end of 2003. Under these
circumstances, I am not persuaded Applicant will be able to adhere to the payment
plans she has recently organized.
6
Applicant deserves credit for trying to earn a college degree while working and
raising children. However, she has too much outstanding debt and offered too little proof
that she is satisfying it for me to conclude it no longer constitutes a security concern,
given the amount that remains outstanding. Upon considering Applicant’s case in the
context of the whole-person concept, I conclude that her application for a security
clearance must be denied.
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot
or will not attain the state of financial rehabilitation necessary to mitigate the financial
consideration security concern. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply
for a security clearance in the future, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of
security worthiness.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c - 1d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f - 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.r - 1.s: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.t - 1.u: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.v - 1.w: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.y - 1.gg: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
