 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05458 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 14, 1997, Applicant completed and certified a security clearance 
application (SF-86). On May 30, 2006, he completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 9, 2009, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant provided two answers to the SOR, dated April 24, 2009, and July 20, 
2009. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant requested that his case be determined on the 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on December 11, 2009. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 
through 14. By letter dated December 30, 2009, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM 
to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections 
within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on January 8, 2010. His response 
was due on February 7, 2010. Applicant did not file any additional information within the 
required time period. On March 19, 2010, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG E, Personal 
Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e) and five allegations of financial delinquency under 
AG F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.e.). (Item 1.) In his Answers to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under AG E and AG F. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact. 
 
 The following facts are established by the record provided by the government in 
this case. The items include Applicant’s 1997 SF-86 and his 2006 e-QIP; official court 
and investigation records; Applicant’s signed, sworn statement of August 21, 1997; 
Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 and Applicant’s 2006 and 2008 credit 
reports. (See Items 4 through 14.) 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old and employed as a senior engineer by a federal 
contractor. He has a high school diploma and some additional vocational school 
training. He has been gainfully employed in computer technology since 1995. From May 
1997 until about March 1998, he was employed as a federal contractor. In 1998 or 
1999, he was awarded a security clearance in order to work at a certain location. From 
March 1998 through September 2004, he held a series of computer technology jobs 
with private businesses. He was fired by an employer in September 2004, after being 
told he was not dependable. Since October 2004, he has been employed as a federal 
contractor. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant married in 1997. He and his wife are the parents of four children, ages 
15, 13, 11, and 8. (Item 4.) 
  
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1987. He began to smoke marijuana two 
times a week when he was a teen-ager. He purchased marijuana from unknown drug 
dealers in his community. He enjoyed using marijuana, but he concluded he would not 
be able to get a better job if he continued to smoke marijuana. When he completed his 
 
1Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
on April 1, 2008, and September 29, 2008. On December 30, 2008, in response to DOHA interrogatories, 
Applicant signed a notarized statement affirming that he had read the summaries of the interviews and 
found them to be true and correct. He made no changes, corrections, or revisions to the investigator’s 
summaries. (Item 6.) 
 
3 
 
 
SF-86 in May 1997, Applicant admitted using marijuana twice between December 1995 
and January 1996. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted marijuana use, with 
varying frequency, from at least 1990 to at least January 1996 and from at least 1999 to 
2001.2 In about 2001, he stopped smoking marijuana. Since that time, he asserts, he 
has not used marijuana or any other illegal drug. When he completed his e-QIP in May 
2006, he denied any illegal drug use in the previous seven years. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 4 
at 34; Item 5; Item 6 at 8.)     
 
 Between 1995 and 1999, Applicant and his girlfriend, who later became his wife, 
were involved in a number of arguments that resulted in physical altercations and 
arrests. In 1995, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Simple Assault and (2) 
Domestic Violence. In February 1996, he was arrested and charged with simple assault. 
In October 1996, he was arrested and charged with Simple Assault-Domestic Violence.   
In November 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with second degree assault 
and possession of marijuana. Applicant pled guilty to the second degree assault charge, 
paid a fine, and received probation before judgment. The marijuana possession charge 
was nolle prossed. In July 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with simple 
assault. He was ordered to take an anger management course and the charge was 
nolle prossed. ( Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Section 23d on the e-QIP that Applicant completed and certified on May 30, 
2006, asks: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to 
alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered “No” to the question at Section 23(d), thereby 
failing to list his arrest and charge of possession of marijuana in November 1997. (Item 
4.) 
 
 Section 23f on Applicant’s 2006 e-QIP asks: “In the last 7 years, have you been 
arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, 
c, d, or e above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was 
alcohol or drug related.)” Applicant responded “Yes” to the question at Section 23f and 
listed a 2005 charge of driving on an expired license. He failed to list that he was 
charged in 1999 with Simple Assault, ordered to attend anger management training, 
and the charge was nolle prossed. (Item 4.)  
 
   Section 24a on Applicant’s 2006 e-QIP asks: “Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 
years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, 
codeine, heroin, etc.) amphetamines, depressants, (barbiturates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?” Applicant 
answered “No” and failed to list that he had used marijuana from at least 1999 to about 
2001. (Item 4.) 
                                            
2 The record does not specify when Applicant was awarded a security clearance, nor does it specify who 
his employer was at the time the clearance was granted. I conclude that there is insufficient record 
evidence to find that Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Question 26 on the SF-86 that Applicant completed and certified on May 14, 
1997 asks: “In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, charged with, or convicted 
of any offense(s) not listed in modules 21, 22, 23, 24, or 25? (Leave out traffic fines of 
less than $150 unless the violation was alcohol or drug related.)”  Applicant answered 
“No.” He failed to list his November 1995 arrest and charge of Simple Assault and 
Domestic Violence; his February 1996 arrest and charge of Simple Assault; and his 
October 1996 arrest and charge of Simple Assault-Domestic Violence. (Item 5.) 
 
 In a signed, sworn statement to an authorized investigator on August 21, 1997, 
Applicant stated that he misread Question 26 and answered “No” because he thought 
the question referred only to felony crimes. He denied deliberate falsification of the 
answer. (Item 7 at 2.)  
 
 Question 27 on Applicant’s May 14, 1997 SF-86 asks if an Applicant has used 
illegal drugs, to include illegal marijuana, “[s]ince the age of 16 or in the last 7 years. 
Applicant answered “Yes” and listed marijuana use twice between December 31, 1995 
and January 1, 1996. He failed to list that he had used marijuana, with varying 
frequency, from at least 1990 to at least January 1996. (Item 5.) 
 
 In October 2002, Applicant filed for chapter 7 bankruptcy. The bankruptcy court 
discharged his delinquent debts in October 2002. (Item 10; Item 14.) 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant failed to meet his financial obligations. The 
SOR alleged at ¶ 2.b. that Applicant owed a creditor a debt of approximately $433, 
which was in collection status and unsatisfied as of January 12, 2009. The SOR alleged 
at ¶ 2.c. that Applicant owed a municipality a delinquent debt of $205 for unpaid parking 
tickets, and, as of July 18, 2006, the debt had not been satisfied. The SOR alleged at ¶ 
2.d. that Applicant owed a creditor $65 on a debt that had not been satisfied as of 
January 12, 2009. Finally, the SOR alleged at ¶ 2.e. that Applicant owed a creditor 
approximately $9,432 on an account that had not been satisfied as of April 1, 2008. 
Applicant admitted the four debts and provided no information to establish that the debts 
had been paid or otherwise satisfied. The four debts appear on Applicant’s credit 
bureau reports. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 9; Item 10.) 
 
 About nine years ago, Applicant paid $200 for a series of credit counseling 
classes that his wife attended. He said the classes did not help him and his wife with 
their financial situation. (Item 6 at 5.)  
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
 
5 
 
 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and signed his SF-86 in May 1997 and his e-QIP in 
May 2006, he failed to provide truthful answers to questions about his drug or alcohol 
charges or convictions, his arrests for assault and domestic violence, and his marijuana 
use.   
 
 The SOR alleged that Appellant’s responses to these questions on his 1997 SF-
86 and his 2006 e-QIP showed he had deliberately falsified material facts by failing to 
admit and disclose his drug arrest, his arrests for assault and domestic violence, and his 
marijuana use.  
  
This information raises a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), which reads as 
follows: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
  Appellant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated if “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts.”  AG ¶17(a).     
 
Applicant did not make good-faith efforts to correct the omissions before being 
confronted with the facts. In his April 2009 and July 2009 answers to the SOR, he 
admitted deliberately falsifying his responses to Questions 26 and 27 on his May 1997 
SF-86.  Moreover, in his answers to the SOR, he also admitted deliberately falsifying his 
responses to Sections 23d, 23f, and 24 on the e-QIP he signed and certified as true on 
May 30, 2006.  
 
Applicant’s deliberate falsifications are a matter of security concern. I conclude 
that none of the Guideline E mitigating factors apply to the facts of his case. 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. In 2002, Applicant’s delinquent debts were discharged in a chapter 7 
bankruptcy, and he was able to resume his financial life with clean slate. However, he 
fell behind again by failing to satisfy several smaller debts and one substantial 
delinquency. He was unwilling or unable to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient 
to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies that dates to at least 2002.  His 
delinquencies are recent and on-going. They have occurred under circumstances that 
are likely to recur.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has been steadily employed since 1995. The record does not support a 
conclusion that his failure to satisfy his creditors is the result of circumstances beyond 
his control. While Applicant provided financial counseling for his wife several years ago, 
he does not appear to have sought similar counseling for himself, and he failed to 
provide documentation that he had made good-faith efforts to satisfy his creditors. His 
debts remain unresolved. In determining an individual's security worthiness, the 
Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her 
outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
1999).  I conclude that none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply to 
the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant deliberately falsified his 
answers to two security clearance applications that he completed and certified in 1997 
and 2006. He has failed to satisfy his financial delinquencies, and he provided no 
documentation to establish that he has established a plan to do so. He did not approach 
his creditors, alert them to his financial problems, and attempt to find a responsible 
resolution for paying or settling his debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal conduct and financial 
delinquencies.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.e.:          Against Applicant 
 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
