 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-06100 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 13, 2009, and DOHA received 
his answer on May 15, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 
 
2 
 
 
28, 2009. The case was assigned to me on July 30, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on August 21, 2009, scheduling the hearing for September 25, 2009. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until October 9, 2009, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant submitted AE L 
through N, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 2, 2009. The record closed on October 9, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His answers 
with explanations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old process technician, who has worked for his defense 
contractor employer since November 1985. He seeks to retain his secret security 
clearance, which is a requirement for his continued employment. Applicant has 
successfully held a clearance for the majority of his employment with his company. 
(GE 1, Tr. 29, 32-36.)  
 
After graduating from high school in approximately May 1975, Applicant 
attended college for three years, but did not graduate. He later attended a community 
college from August 1994 to May 1995, and was awarded a certificate as a licensed 
practical nurse.  (GE 1, Tr. 39-42.)  
 
Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. He was married from June 1989 to 
March 1995. That marriage ended by divorce. Applicant has an eight-year-old son 
from a previous relationship for whom he pays $800 monthly in child support. (GE 1, 
Tr. 30-32, 36-38.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his March 1997 Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF-86), his November 2007 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), DOHA’s September 2008 Interrogatories, his November 2008 Response to 
Interrogatories, his August 1996 Chapter 13 bankruptcy record, his August 2002 
Defense Security Service signed, sworn, statement, as well as his June 1997, 
 
3 
 
 
December 2007, July 2008, December 2008, January 2009, and July 2009 credit 
reports. GE 1 – 12. 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 12 separate debts -- one voluntary repossession, 
four charged off accounts, and seven collection accounts, totaling about $26,000. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. alleged that Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in August 1996 
and was awarded a discharge in August 2002.  Applicant was unable to remain 
current on his debts after his 1995 divorce. Particularly challenging was going from a 
two-income household to a one-income household. After evaluating his options, 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection and repaid his creditors in 
accordance with his repayment plan. (GE 11, Tr. 42-45.)  
 
In October 2006, Applicant had knee surgery and went on a six-week medical 
leave. During this time, he was on disability and his pay was reduced by 25%.  Then, 
from November 2006 to January 2007, his union went on strike, requiring their 
members to join the picket line. On the advice of Applicant’s physician, he did not 
picket, fearing that day-long picketing would hinder his recovery. Applicant testified 
union representatives were sympathetic to his dilemma; however, they informed him if 
he did not join the picket line, he would not receive subsistence payments from the 
strike fund.   
 
During this time, Applicant’s living expenses continued to include paying his 
parents approximately $500 per month in rent. Applicant also chose to loan money to 
a colleague and friend of his, who also was on strike and a single mother. She stated 
Applicant “helped me out quite a bit, he paid a couple of my car payments and my 
electric bill, he also helped me several times buy food for me and my children.”   When 
Applicant went back to work in January 2007, he was seriously in arrears on his debts 
and “the damage was done.” In February 2007, he injured his arm and was out of 
work for another six weeks. (GE 7, pgs. I-6 through I-9, Tr. 47-50, 69-75.)  
 
Applicant consulted a bankruptcy attorney, who advised him to file Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Reluctantly, Applicant did so “as my last resort.” He filed his Chapter 7 
petition in April 2009 and was awarded a discharge in September 2009. All 12 of the 
debts alleged in the SOR were included on Applicant’s Schedule E and were 
discharged. (GE 7, I-6, AE A, Tr. 42-69, 78.) Excluding debts listed on his Schedule E, 
Applicant has been current on his bills for “about a year.” (Tr. 80-81.) Applicant 
completed the mandatory financial counseling required in conjunction with filing 
bankruptcy. (AE L.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has resolved all of the debts alleged. He submitted a 
budget with his monthly expenses that reflects a net remainder of $1,200. His budget 
further demonstrates that he maintains a modest lifestyle and is living within his 
means. (AE M.)  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided three personal reference letters from friends. A 30-year 
friend, who is an elementary school principal, described Applicant as “honest, 
dependable, reliable, and hard working.” Another friend said “[Applicant] would never 
do anything to compromise his position . . . .” Lastly, a five-year friend described 
Applicant as “. . . a valuable friend and asset to his job and community.” (AE B, AE F, 
AE H.) 
 
Applicant provided two reference letters from family members. His sister said 
Applicant “has taken the responsibility of looking after our parents,” and added that he 
is “honest and reliable.” His parents said “[w]e just want you to know that we are most 
grateful that we have a son that was and still is there for us,”  adding “[w]e now know 
that bankruptcy was never his first choice, we saw him exhaust all avenues trying to 
resolve all this.” (AE E, AE G.) 
 
Applicant’s most recent work performance evaluation for 2008-2009 describes 
Applicant’s solid performance and contribution to the defense industry. (AE N.) All 
persons submitting reference letters recommend that Applicant be granted a security 
clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude one relevant security concern is under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and evidence 
presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.b. to 1.m., he had 12 delinquent debts totaling 
about $26,000 that have been in various states of delinquency since at least 2005. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct warrants partial application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) because he did 
not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent debt. Because 
there is more than one delinquent debt, his financial problems are not isolated. It was 
not until 2009 that these debts were resolved. Therefore, his debt is “a continuing 
course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-
11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 
16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt “occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” His 12-year-old 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy lacks security significance because of the passage of time and 
because all debts were repaid.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives full mitigation because of wages lost 
during his 2006 six-week medical leave, wages lost during his company strike from 
October 2006 to January 2007, and financial help given to his aged parents and to a 
lesser extent his friend. Applicant’s medical situation and the union strike were beyond 
his control. Applicant’s conduct towards his parents was selfless and most likely 
spared them significant adverse consequences in their advanced years.1  
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant was required to attend financial counseling in 
conjunction with filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He prepared a detailed budget and 
demonstrates a firm grasp of budgeting, payment plans, and expense reduction. He 
leads a modest lifestyle, lives within his means, and remains current on his present 
obligations. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d) because Applicant has resolved his debts.2 I recognize that Applicant 
explored his options to repay his creditors with his limited funds before filing 
bankruptcy. Applicant has also been current on his non-bankruptcy debts for 
approximately one year. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists 12 
debts approximating $26,000 that were at one time or another in various states of 
delinquency. For several years, he failed to keep his accounts current showing 
financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. His lack of success resolving delinquent 
debt until recently raises sufficient security concerns to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s 25-year record of employment working for a defense contractor weighs 
heavily in his favor. There is no evidence of any security violation during this lengthy 
time. He is a law-abiding citizen. His debts are current and his SOR debts are 
resolved. Applicant did not seek Chapter 7 bankruptcy as a first course of action, but 
rather chose it as a “last resort.” His monthly expenses are current.  
 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His 
company fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He made 
mistakes, and debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to 
trust him. Furthermore, he has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
payments, having remained current on his monthly debts for one year. He also 
showed considerable character helping his elderly parents at great personal expense 
to himself. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.m.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
