 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-08290 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 23, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions, 
Standard Form (SF) 86. On March 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 26, 2009, and DOHA received 
his answer on June 29, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
 
2 
 
 
August 6, 2009. The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2009. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on September 4, 2009, scheduling the hearing for October 23, 2009. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until November 6, 2009, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant submitted AE F 
through R, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 30, 2009. The record closed on November 6, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His answers 
with explanations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old computer administrator, who has worked for his 
defense contractor employer since August 2008. He seeks to retain his secret security 
clearance, which is a requirement for his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 11-13.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1982. He attended a university 
from September 1989 to May 1996, and was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree 
in computer science. (GE 1, Tr. 21-22.)  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from May 1983 to November 1986, and was 
honorably discharged as a specialist 4 (pay grade E-4). His military occupational 
specialty was 71L (Administrative Specialist). He successfully held a security 
clearance during his Army service. (GE 1, AE G(3), Tr. 17-18.) 
 
Applicant was married from May 2001 to September 2005. That marriage 
ended by divorce. He has an 11-year-old daughter born during that marriage. In March 
2007, he was ordered to pay $152 per week in child support and $292 per week in 
spousal support. He remarried in 2005. His current wife is employed as a mental 
health counselor. (GE 1, AE C, 14-20, 67.)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his April 2008 SF-86; his October 2008 responses to DOHA 
Interrogatories; as well as his April 2008, August 2008, October 2008, and December 
2008 credit reports. GE 1 – 7.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified seven separate debts -- one judgment, one state tax 
lien, one charged-off account, two collection accounts, and two past-due accounts, 
approximating $46,000. 
 
Applicant has settled, paid, or otherwise resolved the seven debts alleged. A 
brief summary of each debt follows. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. is a judgment in 
favor of Applicant’s divorce attorney in the amount of $4,315. Applicant submitted 
documentation from his divorce attorney that he is making payments on this account 
and his account is current. (GE 3, AE A, AE K, Tr. 24-29.)  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. is a state tax lien in the amount of $2,710. Applicant 
was making payments to state tax authorities, but used funds earmarked to pay this 
debt when his former wife’s furnace failed in December 2008. He paid to repair her 
furnace so his daughter and former wife would have heat. Applicant provided 
documentation of this furnace repair. He also provided documentation that he 
resumed payments to state tax authorities and his account is current. (GE 3, AE A, AE 
P, AE N, Tr. 29-35.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. is a credit card charged-off account in the 
amount of $753. Applicant paid this account in full. (GE 3, AE A, Tr. 35-38.)  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. is a telephone company collection account in 
the amount of $517. Applicant paid this account in full. (GE 7, pg. I-14, AE A, Tr. 38-
40.)  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. is for child support arrearages owed to the state 
in the amount of $25,467. Applicant submitted documentation that in March 2007 he 
was ordered to pay $152 per week in child support and $292 per week in spousal 
support by way of wage garnishment. He testified that his former wife obtained an ex 
parte support increase without his knowledge, which created a substantial arrearage. 
He also testified and provided documentation that he did not receive credit for money 
paid to her former spouse. He provided documentation of his claim and is actively 
litigating this matter with results pending. It is Applicant’s contention that he is current. 
(GE 3, GE 7, AE C, AE R, Tr. 40-51.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. is for past-due student loans in the amount of 
$12,040. Applicant testified that his former wife was responsible for paying bills while 
they were married. He stated that his wife assured him that she was making payments 
on his student loans and he later discovered that was not the case. Applicant has 
contacted the lender and is in a “rehabilitation” program. He has made payment 
arrangements, and his account is current. (AE A, AE B, AE I, Tr. 51-60.)  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. is a credit card collection account in the amount 
of $597. Applicant paid this account in full. (GE 7, p. I-15, AE A, AE J, Tr. 60-65.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to costs associated with his divorce 
in 2005. He was required to maintain two households on a reduced income. During 
Applicant’s previous marriage, he paid for his wife’s uncovered medical bills and for 
his daughter’s uncovered dental bills. He also incurred unplanned costs associated 
with the deaths of his former in-laws. Furthermore, while struggling to maintain two 
households, he was unemployed for 18 months from August 2005 to January 2007. 
Following his divorce, he fell behind on the majority of his debts. (Tr. 23, 71-74.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has paid, settled, made good-faith efforts to repay 
overdue creditors, or resolved all debts alleged. He submitted a budget with his 
monthly expenses, which reflects a net remainder of $1,300. His budget further 
demonstrates that he maintains a modest lifestyle and is living within his means. (AE 
H, AE Q, Tr. 67-71.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided reference letters from his current supervisor and a co-
worker. His supervisor is a senior manager within Applicant’s company. He described 
him as an employee who is “consistently pleasant,” “tackling all assignments with 
dedication,” “hard worker and always willing to learn,” a “team player” and someone 
who “would make a great asset to any organization.” Applicant’s co-worker referred to 
Applicant as “very cordial, professional” and as someone who “always maintains his 
composure even under the most stressful conditions.” Applicant submitted his most 
recent performance evaluations that reflect sustained solid performance. (AE D, AE E, 
AE M.) 
 
Applicant submitted copies of his honorable discharge certificate from the Army 
as well as a copy of his DD-214 (Certificate of Discharge from Active Duty). 
Collectively, these documents reflect Applicant’s favorable military service. They 
further reflect Applicant’s sense of duty and document three years and six months of 
honorable military service. ( AE G(1-3). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude one relevant security concern is under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and evidence 
presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. to 1.f., he had seven delinquent debts totaling 
about $46,000 that have been in various states of delinquency since at least 2005. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b) 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debt. Because there is more than one delinquent debt, his financial problems are not 
isolated. It was not until 2008 and 2009 that these debts were paid or resolved. 
Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under 
AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
good judgment.”  Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives partial mitigation because of his 2005 
divorce, his 18 months of unemployment, costs associated with the funerals of his in-
laws, and uncovered medical bills. However, he did not provide sufficient information 
to establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek financial 
counseling. He has, however, produced a budget that reflects that he is living within 
his means and regained financial responsibility. Furthermore, there is sufficient 
information to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant has paid, is 
paying, or otherwise resolved his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.d. which relates to purported child support arrearages. Applicant has submitted 
documentation that supports a reasonable basis to dispute the amount owed. To this 
end, he has pending litigation in family court challenging his arrearages.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists seven 
debts approximating $46,000 that were at one time or another in various states of 
delinquency. For several years, he failed to keep his accounts current or negotiate 
lesser payments, showing financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. His lack of 
success resolving delinquent debt until recently raises sufficient security concerns to 
merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of military service and good employment weighs in his favor. There 
is no evidence of any security violation during the time Applicant may have held a 
security clearance. He is a law-abiding citizen. His debts are current and his SOR 
debts are all paid, resolved, or being disputed in the case of his child support 
arrearages. His monthly expenses are current. The Appeal Board has addressed a 
key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His company 
fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He made mistakes, 
 
9 
 
 
and debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. 
He has paid his debts. Furthermore, he has established a “meaningful track record” of 
debt payments. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.g.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
