 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10088 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory D. McCormack, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions on November 21, 
2006. On October 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On November 23, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 31, 2009. The case was assigned to me on January 12, 2010. The hearing 
was originally scheduled for February 11, 2010, but was cancelled due to inclement 
weather. On February 23, 2010, a Notice of Hearing was issued, rescheduling the 
hearing for March 17, 2010. The case was heard on that date. The government offered 
eight exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1–8. Applicant 
testified and submitted no documents. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 25, 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
2
2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 During the hearing, Applicant presented evidence that another defense agency 
granted him eligibility for access to SCI on November 12, 2009. (Applicant’s counsel 
mentioned he was granted a Top Secret/SCI clearance. The memo indicates Applicant 
was granted eligibility for SCI access. It is likely his Top Secret clearance was still valid. 
(see AE F)) This fact raised an issue of whether Applicant should be given reciprocity in 
accordance with section 2-204 of the National Industrial Security Program Operating 
Manual (NISPOM), dated February 28, 2006. Section 2-204 of the NISPOM states, in 
part: 
 
Any previously granted PCL that is based upon a current investigation of a 
scope that meets or exceeds that necessary for the clearance required 
shall provide the basis for a new clearance without further investigation or 
adjudication unless significant derogatory information that was not 
previously adjudicated becomes known to the granting agency.  
 
 I held the record open until March 31, 2010, to allow the parties to submit a 
response pertaining to the reciprocity issue. Both parties submitted a timely response. 
Department Counsel’s response is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant’s exhibit 
is marked as HE II.  
 
 Applicant contends that because another defense agency granted a personal 
clearance/access eligibility to the Applicant based upon a current investigation of a 
scope that met or exceeded that necessary for the clearance required Applicant should 
be issued a security clearance without the requirement of further investigation or 
adjudication. As a result, Applicant’s counsel requests that the SOR be withdrawn. It is 
noted that Applicant’s current supervisor provided a statement indicating a February 
2008 incident report which concerns the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.g was considered 
when adjudicating Applicant’s SCI access which was granted on November 12, 2009. 
 
 Department Counsel contends that reciprocity does not apply because the SOR 
addresses matters that were not previously adjudicated, specifically, Applicant’s job 
termination for cause in August 2009. Department Counsel admits that the other 
defense agency may have been aware of the February 2008 incident report when 
adjudicating his SCI access.    
 
 I find that reciprocity does not apply in Applicant’s case because Applicant’s 
termination for cause in August 2009 is additional derogatory information that was not 
considered when adjudicating Applicant’s SCI access.  
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
3
 On another procedural issue, Department Counsel withdrew the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.c during the hearing. (Tr. 8)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.d, 1.g, and 1.h. He denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. During the hearing, 
Applicant changed his pleadings regarding to ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f from denials to admissions. 
(Tr. 71) 
  
Applicant is a 31-year-old software engineer for a Department of Defense 
contractor who seeks to maintain his security clearance. He has been employed in his 
current position since November 2008. He enlisted in the United States Navy on August 
28, 1997, and separated from active duty on October 20, 2005. He has held a security 
clearance since February 1998. He has a bachelor’s degree in information technology 
and is currently studying for his master’s degree. He is married and has three-year-old 
twin sons. (Tr. 28-35, 37, 75-77, 81; Gov 1; AE C)  
 
In July 2005, Applicant received non-judicial punishment for violating Article 92, 
UCMJ, Failure to Obey a Lawful Order or General Regulation, and Article 128, UCMJ, 
Assault. His punishment included a reduction in rank from E-5 to E-4, 40 days restriction 
and extra duty, and forfeiture of $400 pay per month for two months. (Gov 5) The record 
does not go into detail pertaining to the facts that support the underlying offenses. 
Applicant testified that he was implicated in an investigation involving 25 other 
individuals related to selling orders for sex. He was not involved in the selling orders for 
sex offenses but was investigated for sexual harassment and fraternization charges. 
Although he was not an instructor, he apparently had asked out a female trainee and 
may have touched her on the shoulder. He denies that he was guilty of the offenses 
alleged in the NJP.  (Tr. 31-33, 78-81; Gov 3 at 3-4) 
 
On October 20, 2005, Applicant was involuntarily discharged from the United 
States Navy with a discharge characterized as general (under honorable conditions) 
discharge. The reason for the discharge was misconduct (serious offense). Applicant 
appeared before a discharge board before he was separated. (Gov 4; AE C)   
 
When he separated from the Navy, Applicant worked for one employer for four 
months until he found employment with a large defense contractor (Company A) in 
March 2006. From March 2006 to November 2006, he worked at one location. In 
November 2006, he switched contracts and locations while still employed by Company 
A. (Tr. 86) In October 2007, Company A lost the contract, leaving Applicant without a 
job. At the time his sons were about a year old and his wife was not working. (Tr. 37, 
40-42, 86; Gov 3 at 11) 
 
After two weeks of unemployment, Applicant decided to list on his resume that he 
was a Certified Information System Security Professional (CISSP) in order to improve 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
4
his chances of being interviewed. Applicant was studying for his CISSP certification but 
did not have the certification when he listed it on his resume. He decided that he could 
list it on his resume and would have the certification by the time a prospective employer 
asked for proof. (Tr. 43, 88-89; Gov 3 at 11) 
 
In September 2007, Applicant was interviewed and hired by Company B. During 
the interview, the program manager told him that it was great that he had his CISSP 
certification but it was not needed for a year. Instead of telling the program manager 
that he did not have the certification, Applicant said nothing because he thought it would 
give him more time to complete the certification. (Tr. 90-91; Gov 3 at 11) His program 
manager had a heart attack. The program manager who was in charge of the 
certification program for Company B replaced him.  While on sick leave in late 2007, 
Applicant was sent an e-mail from the new program manager asking for his CISSP 
certification.  Instead of telling the program manager that he did not have a CISSP 
certification, Applicant obtained a false certification document from a web-site that 
generated diplomas and certifications for a fee.  He paid about $200 for the service. 
After he received the false CISSP certification, he sent it to the program manager. He 
testified that he knew he had crossed a line so he resigned the next day. This occurred 
in February 2008. (Tr. 46-50, 91-94; Gov 3 at 11-12)  
 
Applicant states that this conduct was completely out of character for him. Being 
a new father and the only income-provider for his family contributed to his subsequent 
bad decisions. He does not intend to repeat similar conduct in the future. (Tr. 72-73, 
119; Gov 3 at 12)  
 
After he resigned from Company B, Applicant was unemployed for one and a half 
months. When he interviewed with Company C, he informed them about his false 
CISSP certification but was hired anyway. He later discovered that Company B sent in 
an incident report regarding the false CISSP certification related to his security 
clearance. In April 2008, he started to work for Company C. After about a month, 
Company C lost the contract and Applicant needed to find a new job. He worked as 
contractor for another government agency for a few months until he was hired back by 
Company A. He has worked for Company A since November 2008. (Tr. 52-59, 97-98) 
 
In May 2009, Applicant was hired by Company D.  This was a second full-time 
job. He was still employed full-time with Company A. He claims that his program 
manager at Company D was aware that he worked another full-time job. (It was actually 
his program manager at the work place who worked for the company who had the prime 
contract. Applicant’s employer was a subcontractor.) On August 24, 2009, the Director 
of Human Resources from Company D notified Applicant that he was being terminated 
for inaccurate timekeeping. Applicant took time off to attend classes. Applicant believed 
that as long as he put his days off on the office calendar “it was okay.” He certified his 
time cards before being paid twice a month. He did not list the time taken off to attend 
classes on his timesheets. At times, he would take days off and not indicate the days off 
on his timesheets. At the end of each pay period, he verified that the documentation 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
5
provided was true and accurate to the best of his knowledge. He also believed that his 
contract was not based on hours but on deliverables. (Tr. 60-67; Gov 6 at 2-3) 
 
Company D’s Director of Human Resources mentioned in an e-mail dated 
August 24, 2009, that she reminded Applicant that he had signed off on the company’s 
timesheet policy and the acknowledgment of the company handbook which stated 
Company D’s policies regarding total time accounting and timekeeping. (Gov 6 at 3-4) 
Applicant testified that he never received a copy of Company D’s handbook or 
timesheet policy. He also never received ethics training. (Tr. 64-67, 99, 101-105) 
 
Applicant testified that he believed that he was allowed paid time off to attend 
classes. He put the dates that he was at class on the public calendar and sent e-mails. 
He did not have a written agreement with Company D indicating that he could take paid 
time off to attend classes. He was told by the Human Resource Advisor that in 
government contracting you cannot claim for hours worked for a contract task unless 
you actually worked those hours. (Tr. 111-114; Gov 6 at 9) 
 
The deputy project manager of the company that had the prime contract when 
Applicant worked for Company D wrote a letter stating that Applicant worked with him 
on a daily basis from 2008 to 2009. He describes Applicant as an “honest, hard working 
and dedicated individual.” When he learned that Applicant was terminated for inaccurate 
timekeeping, he told his superiors that he believed there was a miscommunication. He 
believed the company that owned the prime contract and the government contractor 
approved Applicant’s time away from the contract in order to attend classes. He states 
Applicant always let the Government and management know when he was not at work 
and taking classes. (I give the deputy project manager’s assertions less weight because 
he did not testify and was not subject to cross examination.) The deputy project 
manager was also aware that Applicant was working a second job. He looks forward to 
working with Applicant on future projects. He believes that if Applicant is not granted a 
security clearance, it would be an unfortunate loss for the national interest of the United 
States. (AE A)  
 
Company D had a policy that required employees to report outside employment 
to their immediate supervisor, group general manager, staff vice president, or ethics 
compliance officer. It would then be determined whether the outside employment would 
be permitted. Although Applicant told the deputy project manager that had the prime 
contract that he had another full-time job, it is unlikely he informed his superiors at 
Company D. I make this conclusion based on Company D’s Human Resource Director’s 
asking him on the day of his termination whether this was the first time he worked for a 
government contractor. (Gov 6 at 3; Gov 8; AE A)   
 
Applicant’s current government supervisor wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf. 
He is a retired Sergeant Major who served over 27 years in the U.S. Army. He states 
Applicant is a man of great integrity, who is dedicated to his family and work. He has 
known Applicant for two years and is impressed with his professional conduct. He 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
6
believes Applicant can be trusted and should be allowed to maintain his cleared status. 
The supervisor was aware of the February 2008 incident report when Applicant started 
to work for him two years ago. He claims Applicant was honest and wrote the necessary 
statements required by the government agency. He underwent an SCI background 
investigation and a government agency suitability determination. He indicates Applicant 
provides a positive influence and his truthfulness is an example for all to follow. (AE D, 
Letter of C.F., Sergeant Major, U.S. Army (RET), dated February 15, 2010)    
 
Applicant provided additional character references. His references describe 
Applicant as “hard working,” “conscientious,” and “trustworthy.” Most were informed of 
the SOR allegations and were surprised. (AE D)  Applicant’s performance evaluations 
while on active duty state that he meets or exceeds standards. His military awards and 
decorations include the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal (2), Good Conduct 
Medal (2), National Defense Service Medal, Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, Sea 
Service Deployment Ribbon, Navy Pistol Shot Ribbon (Marksman); and the Global War 
on Terrorism Service Medal. (AE C) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are still required in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
7
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The following personal conduct disqualifying conditions potentially apply to the 
facts of this case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities); 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative); 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
8
AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources); and  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing). 
 
 AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. Applicant 
knowingly provided false information on his resume in order to enhance his employment 
qualifications. During his job interview with Company B, he was given the opportunity to 
clarify that he was not CISSP certified but said nothing. When he was asked to provide 
proof of his CISSP certification, he purchased a false CISSP certification from a 
company based on the Internet. Applicant went to great lengths to falsely indicate that 
he was CISSP certified. He perpetuated the falsehood over the five-month period he 
was employed with Company B.   
 
 SOR ¶1.g is found for Applicant. This allegation does not raise a new pleading 
but rather summarizes facts that are relevant to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 
1.f. 
 
 AG ¶ 16(d) applies pertaining to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 1.h.  
Between 2005 and August 2009, Applicant was involved in significant misconduct which 
raised issues of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. In 2005, Applicant was punished 
under Article 15 for failure to obey orders and assault. While more information about the 
underlying offenses would have been helpful, it is clear that the Navy considered the 
offense was serious based on the subsequent involuntary discharge proceeding for 
misconduct (serious offense). From September 2007 to February 2008, he falsely 
claimed to be CISSP certified. He went to great lengths to perpetuate this falsehood.  
Sometime between May 2009 and August 24, 2009, Applicant inaccurately claimed that 
he worked hours on his timesheets when he was out of the office. 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
9
 Although Applicant claims that he had permission to take paid time off from work 
at Company D when he was attending class, the management at Company D did not 
give him permission to do so. While the project manager of the company who held the 
primary contract wrote a letter stating Applicant let him know about his second job and 
about his time off, he was not an official representative of Applicant’s company and did 
not have authority to grant approval. AG ¶ 16(d) applies because of Applicant’s conduct 
between 2005 and August 2009 reveals a pattern of dishonesty and rule violations. His 
inaccurate timekeeping when employed at Company D raised additional questions 
about his integrity and is evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. In Applicant’s situation, it was a significant misuse of his 
employer’s time and resources.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(e) applies because Applicant’s past falsifications about his computer 
certifications made him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant 
was aware that if Company B discovered that he was not CISSP certified he would be 
fired. As a result, he took the falsehood one step further by purchasing a false 
certification over the Internet and presenting it to Company B. If Applicant were to be 
discovered, it would have affected his professional standing.  
 
 The following personal conduct mitigating conditions potentially apply to 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, of falsification before being confronted with the 
facts); 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress). 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Applicant had the opportunity to tell the program 
manager during his interview with Company B that he did not have the CISSP 
certification. He chose not to say anything because he thought he would eventually 
become certified. He had another opportunity to say he was not certified when he was 
asked to provide a copy of his CISSP certification. Instead, he chose to purchase a 
false CISSP certification and present that to Company B. Although Applicant left his 
employment with Company B because he states he realized that he went too far, he 
never told Company B about the false certification document. Company B later filed an 
incident report in JPAS in February 2008. (This fact is not disputed although the record 
does not contain a copy of the incident report.) Although Applicant apparently disclosed 
the facts related to his falsely claiming that he was CISSP certified to his subsequent 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
10
employer, he did not disclose that he was not CISSP certified during the five months 
that he worked for Company B. Thus, he did not make a prompt good-faith effort to 
correct his deliberate falsification.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because of the seriousness of Applicant’s conduct. He 
has had a pattern of questionable behavior since 2005 when he received NJP for failure 
to obey an order and assault. An offense considered serious enough by the Navy to 
involuntarily discharge him for misconduct (serious offense). Two years later, he 
deliberately holds himself out as being CISSP qualified in order to enhance his job 
qualifications. Once hired, he perpetuates the falsehood for five months until he is told 
to provide his certification.  He then obtains and presents a false CISSP certification 
rather than telling the truth. In May 2009, he is terminated for cause from Company D 
for inaccurate time-keeping.  All of these offenses are serious. Applicant’s behavior over 
the past five years raises questions about his judgment, trustworthiness and reliability.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) applies because Applicant subsequently disclosed the conduct 
related to his falsification of a CISSP certification to subsequent employers which 
reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.    
 
Overall, Applicant was involved in three significant incidents over the past five 
years that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. While he 
provided some mitigating evidence, each of these incidents raised questions about 
Applicant’s integrity. Applicant has not mitigated the concerns under personal conduct.   
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
11
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While Applicant provided significant 
mitigating evidence, his history of questionable conduct over the past five years, the 
most recent incident occurring in August 2009, outweigh the mitigating evidence and 
raise questions about his ability to handle classified information. The security concerns 
raised under Personal Conduct are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  
           Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
