 
1 
 
`                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11614 
  ) 
 SSN: ) 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an undated 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 17, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
August 7, 2009, and reassigned to me on October 13, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
hearing on November 9, 2009, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
December 8, 2009. After an amendment to the SOR, as discussed below, I granted a 
continuance of the case until January 28, 2010. That hearing was conducted by video 
teleconference (VTC). DOHA received the transcript of the first hearing (Tr.1) on 
December 15, 2009, and the transcript of the second hearing (Tr.2) on February 3, 
2010.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
 At the first hearing on December 8, 2009, the Government offered Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 10, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objection. 
 
At the second hearing on January 28, 2010, the Government offered GE 11, 
which was received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called a 
witness,1 and submitted AE G through R, which were admitted without objection.  
 
The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted AE S through SS, which were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding two allegations under 
Guideline F, as follows: 
 
1.f. As of December 8, 2009, you had not filed your federal income tax 
return for tax year 2007. 
 
1.g. As of December 8, 2009, you had not filed your federal income tax 
return for tax year 2008. 
 
Applicant did not object to the amendment, and it was granted. A continuance 
was granted to permit Applicant to respond to the amendment. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
retain his security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since May 2006. 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s witness was driving from another state and was not present when the hearing 
started. She was still a substantial distance away when it was time for her to testify. She pulled over to 
the side of the road, and her testimony was taken telephonically. 
 
 
3 
 
He has a Master’s degree, awarded in 1993. He is married with two children, ages eight 
and seven.2  
 
 Before he accepted his current job, Applicant was self-employed, working in the 
areas of property management and software development. He also worked as a 
software developer for two corporations between 1993 and 2001, and 2004 to 2005. 
Applicant and his wife purchased their home in state A for about $190,000 in 1995. He 
later took out a second mortgage/home equity loan on the property for about $50,000, 
which he used for his business. It appears he may have also refinanced his first 
mortgage at some point. Applicant accepted his current job in state B in May 2006. At 
that point, the balances on his primary and secondary mortgages were about $169,000 
and $42,600. Applicant placed the house on the market, asking about $200,000, but the 
house did not sell. After several months without a buyer, the house was rented in 
November 2006. The tenant paid the rent for about a year and then stopped paying. 
Applicant stopped paying the mortgages in October 2008. Applicant placed the house 
back on the market but was unable to sell it. He made the decision that it was not 
financially wise to keep paying the mortgages, and he permitted the house to go to 
foreclosure. The tenant was finally evicted in March 2009.3  
 
 Applicant and the mortgagor worked out a “short sale” of the house. His 
documents indicated the house sale was scheduled to close on March 10, 2010. The 
purchase price of the house was $150,000. The first and second mortgages were held 
by the same financial institution. After closing costs, the mortgagor was scheduled to 
receive $136,953 from the sale. That would leave a deficiency of about $25,000 on the 
first mortgage. Under the terms of a short sale, the mortgagor agrees to accept a sale 
price less than the amount of the mortgage and release the homeowner from liability for 
the deficiency. Applicant testified that he believed the short sale covered both the first 
and second mortgage. The short sale documents do not specifically state that both 
mortgages are covered. However, the sale could not proceed without the approval of 
the lienholder of the second mortgage. The mortgagor had apparently given up hope of 
collecting the second mortgage because a credit report obtained on January 21, 2010, 
showed the second mortgage as “charged off.” The balance of the second mortgage is 
listed at $43,000.4 
 
 Applicant’s wife also has a Master’s degree. She works and their combined 
income is substantial. They rented a home in state B for several months after they 
moved there. They then purchased a new home in July 2006. Applicant obtained a first 
mortgage on the property for $200,000 and a second mortgage for $50,000. There is no 
indication of any payment issues on these mortgages.5  
 
                                                          
2 Tr.1 at 42, 69-70; GE 1; AE S. 
 
3 Tr.1 at 20-27, 41-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE S. 
 
4 Tr.1 at 27-28; Tr.2 at 18-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 11; AE B, G, H, S, PP. 
 
5 Tr.1 at 29, 40-43; AE S, EE. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant bought an investment property from a builder in state B for $600,000 in 
June 2007. The sale was financed with a 30-year $600,000 mortgage, with monthly 
payments of $5,713. The house was appraised at $700,000, and Applicant thought he 
could sell or “flip” the house in a short period for $650,000 to $700,000. Throughout the 
hearing, Applicant stated that he believed he had $100,000 in equity in the property 
because they purchased it at less than the appraised value. The housing market quickly 
collapsed. He lowered the asking price to about $590,000, but was unable to sell the 
house. He stopped paying the mortgage in about November 2007, and let the home go 
into foreclosure.6  
 
 Applicant stated that the decisions to stop paying his mortgages were difficult 
ones. He stated “[t]hey were simply losing too much value to attempt to salvage at their 
current loan rate.” Regarding the house in state A, he testified that “it really didn’t make 
financial sense to work with the property any more because of the large amount that we 
needed up front and the fact that the property was under the value that was required.”7 
When he responded to DOHA interrogatories in March 2009, he wrote: 
 
I am still in the process of deciding if this property is worth retaining. With 
this current economy it is not prudent to invest money into a property that 
is losing value.8 
 
 Applicant’s mortgagor issued an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form 1099-A 
(Acquisition or Abandonment of Secured Property) for tax year 2008. The form indicated 
that the lender acquired the property on May 1, 2008. The balance of the principal on 
the mortgage at that time was listed as $600,899, and the fair market value of the 
property was listed at $293,894. Applicant testified that the house was actually sold and 
$293,894 was the sales price. Applicant was asked at the first hearing about the tax 
consequences of the 1099-A form. He stated that he had not yet filed his 2007 and 
2008 tax returns.9  
 
 Applicant’s accountant testified at the second hearing. She stated the 2007 and 
2008 tax returns had been prepared and were in the process of being submitted. 
Applicant submitted proof after the hearing that the returns had been filed. The returns 
indicate that Applicant can expect refunds of about $26,000 for tax year 2007, and 
$13,000 for tax year 2008. The accountant testified about the 1099-A form. She 
indicated that form did not impose any tax consequences, as it merely notifies the 
taxpayer and the IRS of the fair market value of the property. There are no tax 
consequences because it does not affect the underlying debt, which the 
taxpayer/Applicant still owes. If, as Applicant testified, the property sold for $293,894, 
his indebtedness on the mortgage is about $307,000. The mortgagor can attempt to 
                                                          
6 Tr.1 at 28-36, 46-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6; AE S. 
 
7 Tr.1 at 27, 38-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6; AE S, EE. 
 
8 GE 5. 
 
9 Tr.1 at 36-37, 50-57; AE C, S. 
 
 
5 
 
collect the debt, or it can issue an IRS form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt). If the 
mortgagor forgives the debt and issues a 1099-C, then there are potential tax 
consequences. Tax liability depends upon whether the taxpayer is insolvent, as 
determined by an IRS formula. Applicant’s accountant prepared an insolvency 
worksheet. The worksheet is not yet applicable, as the mortgagor has not issued a 
1099-C. Applicant stated that the worksheet indicates that there will be no tax liability if 
a 1099-C is issued.10 
 
 Applicant bought another investment property in state B in October 2007. That 
was four months after he put the first investment property on the market, and a month 
before he stopped paying the mortgage on the first property. The property was a four-
unit building that he bought for $400,000. He intended to sell the property at a profit. He 
was unable to sell the property and started leasing the units in April 2008. He stated that 
his property manager stole the tenants’ rent and did not forward the rent payments. 
Applicant stopped paying the mortgage in February 2009, and it went into foreclosure in 
May 2009.11  
 
 In addition to the delinquent mortgages, the SOR alleged two other delinquent 
debts. The $44 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was an association fee on the property in 
state A, which was supposed to be paid by Applicant’s tenant. Applicant paid that debt 
in July 2009. Applicant’s tenant in state A made improvements to the property without 
Applicant’s permission, and then did not pay the contractor. A $1,300 mechanic’s lien 
was placed on the property. That debt was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant settled this 
debt in January 2009, and the lien was released.12 
 
 In May 2008, Applicant self-reported the foreclosure of his first investment 
property and the mechanic’s lien on his house in state A to his security manager. 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. Other than his unpaid mortgages, 
Applicant’s finances are sound. His 2007 tax return showed he and his wife earned 
$170,598. They reported $177,571 in income on their 2008 tax return. Applicant stated 
they currently both earn “six-figure” salaries. His insolvency worksheet reported 
$150,000 in retirement accounts and $25,309 in cash and bank accounts. He has about 
$2,000 per month in discretionary income. He has loans against his retirement 
accounts. He indicated that he planned on using his income tax refunds to pay off his 
retirement account loans, which would increase his monthly discretionary income to 
about $4,000. He stated that the mortgagors have taken no steps to attempt to collect 
the deficiencies owed on his foreclosed properties. If the mortgagors attempt to enforce 
their debts, he will retain an attorney and negotiate a settlement or otherwise resolve 
the debts. He has the resources to address the debts if that occurs. He and his wife 
                                                          
10 Tr.2 at 14-16, 22-23, 27-45; AE K, L-R, W, X, Y, FF-HH, QQ, RR. 
 
11 Tr.1 at 61-67; AE S. The foreclosure of the second investment property was not alleged in the 
SOR. It will not be used for disqualification purposes. It will be considered in assessing Applicant’s overall 
financial situation; in the application of mitigating conditions; and in evaluating the “whole person.” 
12 Tr.1 at 20, 25, 38, 48-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6, 8, 9; AE A, D-F. 
 
 
6 
 
have ended their investments in real estate and do not plan on entering that market 
again. Applicant submitted information establishing that he is a valued employee.13  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
13 Tr.1 at 37-39, 48, 70; Tr.2 at 23-24, 46, 64-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE T, U, W, 
X, EE, GG, II, JJ. 
 
 
7 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. He did not timely file his 2007 and 2008 federal 
income tax returns. The evidence is sufficient to raise all the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
8 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant filed his 2007 and 2008 federal income tax returns. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
applicable to SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g.  
 
 Applicant still owes more than $300,000 for deficiencies on foreclosed 
mortgages. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable to 
his unpaid debts.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to the downturn in the real estate 
market. He also had a tenant who did not pay the rent and a property manager that 
stole from him. Those events were outside Applicant’s control. His decision to invest in 
the real estate market was completely within his control. AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that 
the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant and his wife have 
good jobs and earn substantial salaries. He has about $25,000 in cash and bank 
accounts and $150,000 in retirement accounts. He could have afforded to pay the 
mortgages on the state A house if he chose to do so. He decided not to, stating it was 
“not prudent to invest money into a property that is losing value.” His ability to pay the 
mortgages on the state A home was further hampered by the poor business decision to 
invest in real estate properties. He bought the investment property in July 2007, 
knowing that he had recently been forced to rent the state A house because he was 
unable to sell it. He thought he could “flip” the house and make a quick profit. That 
house was on the market four months when he bought another investment property in 
October 2007. That was just one month before he stopped paying the mortgage on the 
first investment property. I do not find that Applicant acted responsibly by buying 
investment properties while he was unable to sell his first house. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. His mortgagor agreed to a short 
sale of the state A house. That ends his legal liability for the primary mortgage. His legal 
liability for the second mortgage/home equity loan is less clear, although it appears the 
mortgagor agreed to the sale and listed the loan as “charged off.” There are indications 
that the state A mortgages are resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable to the primary 
mortgage on the state A house, and that debt is mitigated. The secondary mortgage is 
more problematic, even if the debt is no longer legally enforceable because of the short 
sale. Applicant did not benefit financially from the primary mortgage and the mortgage 
on the investment property. However, he received $50,000 from the second 
mortgage/home equity loan, which he used for his own purposes. He has the financial 
means to pay that debt, but chose not to because it would not be “prudent.” AG ¶ 20(c) 
is partially applicable to the secondary mortgage.  
 
 
9 
 
 Applicant owes about $307,000 on the deficiency for the investment property’s 
mortgage. Applicant states it is unlikely the mortgagor will proceed against him. That 
may be so, but it does not constitute a resolution of that problem. AG ¶ 20(c) is not 
applicable to the deficiency owed on the investment property’s mortgage. Applicant’s 
actions do not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his 
mortgages.14 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to his unpaid mortgages.  
 
 Applicant paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable 
to those debts.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that financial concerns are still present despite some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
                                                          
14 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
10 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s positive work record and his overall financial situation. Applicant’s finances 
would be in great shape if he did not have real estate issues. He and his wife have large 
salaries, and he has substantial savings and retirement accounts. However, he made 
risky investments and incurred large losses. In reality, the mortgagors incurred large 
losses, because Applicant has not paid them. He took $50,000 in equity out of his home 
in state A and used that money for his business. Despite the ability to pay that debt, he 
chose not to pay it. He currently owes more than $300,000 on the mortgage for his 
foreclosed investment property. He has taken no action on that debt, other than to 
assume the mortgagor will not attempt to enforce it. Applicant’s finances continue to 
raise doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                                                               
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
