 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-11788 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2008, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s 
security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 30, 2009, and DOHA received 
his answer on July 6, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 28, 
 
2 
 
 
2009, and I received the case assignment on July 30, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on August 21, 2009, scheduling the case for September 23, 2009. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until September 30, 2009, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE 
F through I, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 1, 2009. The record closed on October 1, 2009.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of the summary 
of facts contained in Ex. I(A) as well as those facts in Exs. I through VII. Without 
objection from Applicant, I took administrative notice of facts as requested by 
Department Counsel. (Tr. 19-20.) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Pakistan were derived from Exs. I(A), and I through VII as contained infra under the 
subheading “Pakistan” of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior technical planner, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since August 2007. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance and testified that obtaining a clearance is a condition of his continued 
employment. (GE 1, Tr. 21-23.)  
 
Applicant was born in April 1952 in Pakistan, where he was raised and spent his 
formative years. (GE 1, Tr. 23-24.) His education in Pakistan initially consisted of “ten-
year schooling” or “matriculation” followed by two years of further education or “higher 
secondary.” He attended a university from 1969 to 1973 and was awarded a Bachelor of 
 
3 
 
 
                                                     
Science degree in electrical engineering in May 1974. Similarly, Applicant’s wife, age 
46, was born in June 1963 in Pakistan, where she was raised and educated. They 
married in Pakistan in August 1982. 
 
He immigrated to the U.S. in December 1992 on an F-1 (student) visa to further 
his education. He attended a U.S. university from January 1993 to June 1995 and was 
awarded a Master of Business Administration degree in July 1995. He has also been 
awarded two career-related professional certifications. (Response to SOR, GE 1, Tr. 24-
28, 78-79.) From June 1995 to March 1998, Applicant and his spouse lived in Canada. 
In March 1998, they returned to the U.S. (Tr. 79-80.)  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen on May 30, 2007, and his wife became a U.S. 
citizen on May 18, 2007. He testified that he and his wife were issued their U.S. 
passports shortly after becoming U.S. citizens. (GE 1, Tr. 28-34.) Applicant and his wife 
are dual citizens of the United States, Canada, and Pakistan. (Response to SOR.) 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) It is Applicant’s intent to remain permanently in the U.S. (Tr. 79-
80.)  
 
Applicant and his wife have two children, a nine-year-old son and a six-year-old 
daughter. (Response to SOR, GE 1, Tr. 44-45.) His spouse is a housewife. Applicant’s 
children are U.S.-born citizens, attend public school, and are involved in local activities. 
(AE D, Tr. 92.)  
 
Applicant has numerous relatives in Pakistan. His father passed away in 1968. 
His father made his living as a landowner renting land to local farmers. Applicant’s 
mother is 77 years old,1 mother of nine children and a career housewife. She is citizen 
and resident of Pakistan. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) Applicant speaks to his mother on the telephone 
“once a week.” Applicant described his mother’s health as somewhere between “poor” 
and “fair” and added that she gets around with difficulty. (Response to SOR, Tr. 40-41, 
48, 51-52, 81.)  
 
Applicant has two brothers, ages 49 and 43. Both brothers are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan. His 49-year-old brother manages the family property in Pakistan. 
He is married and has six children. His 43-year-old brother owns a tile factory. He is 
married and has three children. Applicant speaks to his 49-year-old brother on the 
telephone “two to three” times a year and speaks to his 43-year-old brother on the 
telephone “almost one time a week.” Neither brother is associated with the Pakistani 
Government. (Response to SOR, GE 1, Tr. 45-52.) 
 
Applicant has six sisters, ages 59, 54, 52, 46, 45, and 40. Applicant’s 59-year-old 
sister is a housewife and lives with her family in the U.S. She is a dual citizen of 
Pakistan and the United States. (SOR ¶ 1.g.) She is married and has three children. Her 
husband retired from the Pakistani Navy, and after he retired, he and his family moved 
1 While every attempt was made to provide accurate ages of Applicant’s family members, ages were 
derived from birth dates provided by Applicant, which in some cases were estimates. (GE 1, AE E, Tr. 86-
88.) 
 
4 
 
 
to the U.S. in 1993. He is employed as a special needs teacher. (SOR ¶ 1.i.) Applicant 
speaks to this sister by telephone every “two to three months.” (Response to SOR, Tr. 
61-63, 70-71.)  
 
Applicant’s 54-year-old sister is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. She is 
married, a housewife, and has five children. Her husband is a self-employed real estate 
agent, and he also does some brokerage work. Applicant has not communicated with 
this sister in the past two years. (Response to SOR, Tr, 57-59.) 
 
Applicant’s 52-year-old sister is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. She is a 
widow and lives with her (Applicant’s) mother. She does not have any children and lives 
off income derived from managing family property. Applicant speaks to this sister on the 
telephone “[a]lmost every week.” Additionally, Applicant’s 43-year-old brother and his 
family live with Applicant’s mother and 52-year-old widowed sister in the same house, 
discussed supra and infra. (Response to SOR, Tr. 56-57, 59-61.) 
 
Applicant’s 46-year-old sister is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. She is 
married, a housewife, and has one child. Her husband is a sales manager for a private 
firm. Applicant has not communicated with this sister for two years. She is a citizen and 
resident of Pakistan. (Response to SOR, Tr. 54-56.) 
 
Applicant’s 45-year-old sister is a citizen of Pakistan and Canada, and a resident 
of Canada. She is married, a housewife, and has three children. Her husband used to 
work for the Canadian Post Office, but now works in marketing in the private sector. 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.) Applicant speaks to this sister on the telephone about “[o]nce a year.” 
(Response to SOR, Tr. 52-54.) 
 
Applicant’s 40-year-old sister is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. She is 
married, a housewife, and has four children. Her husband is a medical doctor. Applicant 
estimates that he has not spoken to her “for one year.” (Response to SOR, GE 1, Tr. 
84-85.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, age 67, and father-in-law, age 75, are dual citizens of 
Pakistan and Canada. Applicant’s father-in-law derives his income from revenue 
generated from a combination of commercial and residential properties in Pakistan. His 
mother-in-law is a housewife. Applicant’s in-laws apportion their time between Pakistan 
and Canada. (SOR ¶¶ 1.k. and 1.l.) They have a total of seven children, two males and 
five females. (Response to SOR, Tr. 63-66.)  
 
Applicant’s two brothers-in-law are citizens and residents of Pakistan. (SOR ¶ 
1.h.) One of his brothers-in-law owns a private elementary school in Pakistan. That 
brother-in-law is married and has three children. Applicant speaks to this brother-in-law 
on the telephone “occasionally” or every “six months,” however, his wife speaks to her 
brother (Applicant’s brother-in-law) on the telephone “[e]very two, three months.” (Tr. 
66-68.) Applicant’s other brother-in-law is a resident of the United States and is a dual 
citizen of Pakistan and Canada. He is a software engineer employed by a private web 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
developer. He has lived in the U.S. for the “last two, three years” and not in Pakistan as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant speaks to this brother-in-law “once a month,” however, 
his wife speaks to her brother (Applicant’s brother-in-law) living in the U.S. “at least two, 
three times a week.” (Tr. 68-70.) 
 
Applicant also owns the home in Pakistan where his mother, 52-year-old 
widowed sister, and 43-year-old brother and family live. Applicant described this 
property as a single family, two-story home with an approximate value in U.S. dollars of 
$250,000. He acquired this home in 1977 from his mother and plans to sell it when the 
real estate market improves. (SOR ¶ 1.m.) (Response to SOR, Tr. 72-76.) Additionally, 
Applicant owns commercial real estate in Pakistan with an approximate value in U.S. 
dollars of $50,000. Applicant described this property as a store under construction 
located in a mall. He plans to sell this property when construction is complete. (SOR ¶ 
1.n.) (Response to SOR, Tr. 76-78.) Applicant also plans to renounce his Pakistani 
citizenship when he sells his property in Pakistan. (Tr. 97-98.) 
 
Applicant described his family as “not involved in politics” in Pakistan or as 
apolitical. (Tr. 90.) Since living in the U.S., he has owned two homes, but is currently 
renting his family residence. (Tr. 90-91.) He estimates his U.S. net worth to be 
$150,000. (AE A - AE C, Tr. 92.) Applicant spends his discretionary free time with his 
family. (Tr. 93.) In the last seven years, he traveled to Pakistan three times – April to 
May 2003, August to September 2005, and December 2005. During this timeframe, he 
also traveled to Canada two times – May 2004 and November 2005. The purpose of 
these visits was primarily to visit family members. (GE 1, Tr. 93-94.) Several family 
members living in the U.S. and Pakistan have visited Applicant at his home. (Tr. 94-95.)  
 
Applicant stated his loyalties are with the U.S., that he considers himself to be a 
loyal U.S. citizen, and that if he were approached by anyone soliciting classified 
information from him, he would report such an overture to proper authority. Except as 
noted, all of Applicant’s assets are U.S.-based. He belongs to one professional project 
management-related organization and completed a number of professional training 
courses offered through his employers. (AE D, Tr. 100-105.) Applicant submitted his 
work performance evaluation for 2008 which reflects solid performance. He also 
received a Team Achievement Award in 2008, a cash achievement award, and an 
individual achievement award, all in 2008. (AE F – I.) 
 
Pakistan2 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Pakistan is a parliamentary 
federal republic in South Asia with a population of nearly 170 million people. Pakistan is 
a low-income country, with a population that is 97% Muslim. It has a coalition 
government led by Prime Minister Yousef Gilani and president Asif Ali Zardari, widower 
of assassinated Pakistan People’s Party leader Benazir Bhutto. 
2 The contents of the Pakistan section are taken in whole or in part from Exs. I(A) through VII. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Although Pakistan was one of only three countries to recognize the Taliban 
regime of Afghanistan, after September 11, 2001, Pakistan reassessed its relations with 
the Taliban and pledged support to the U.S. and international coalition in Operation 
Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from power. Despite this support, members of 
the Taliban are known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of 
Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The 
leader of the Taliban, Mullah Omar, is operating openly in Pakistan. Extremists led by 
Pakistani Taliban (Tehrik-i-Taliban “TTP”) commander Baitullah Mehsud and other al-
Qaeda extremists have re-exerted their hold over areas in the FATA and the North West 
Frontier Province (NWFP). The TTP has gained support by promising to fill a vacuum 
left by ineffective government structures.  
 
Streams of Taliban financing crossing the border of Pakistan to Afghanistan has 
allowed the insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its military and technical 
capabilities. In addition to the Taliban, the FATA in Pakistan continues to be a vital 
sanctuary to al-Qaeda and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Despite Pakistani military operations against extremists that directly challenge Pakistani 
government authority, Taliban, al-Qaeda, and other Pakistani militant groups continue to 
use Pakistan as a safe haven for organizing, training, and planning attacks against the 
United States and its allies in Afghanistan, India, and Europe. Al-Qaeda and other 
Afghan extremist groups exploit that operating environment to plan operations, direct 
propaganda, recruit and train operatives, and raise funds. 
 
 Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts, but its record of 
dealing with militants has been mixed. Pakistan has demonstrated determination and 
persistence in combating militants it perceives to be dangerous to Pakistan’s interests, 
particularly those involved in attacks in settled areas, but it has not consistently pursued 
militants focused on Afghanistan, and still considers militant groups to be important to 
its efforts to counter India’s military and economic advantages. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State has defined terrorist safe havens as ungoverned, 
under-governed, or ill-governed areas of a country and non-physical areas where 
terrorist groups that constitute a threat to U.S. national security interests are able to 
organize, plan, raise funds, communicate, recruit, train, and operate in relative security 
because of inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both. For those reasons 
discussed above and others, the U.S. Department of State has concluded that the 
Afghan-Pakistan border and the FATA, NWFP, and the Baluchistan areas of Pakistan 
are terrorist safe havens. 
 
 The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to Pakistan 
in light of the threat of terrorist activity, specifically the presence of al-Qaeda, Taliban 
elements, and indigenous sectarian groups that pose a danger to American citizens. 
International terrorist organizations, including al-Qaeda, continue to carry out attacks in 
Pakistan. In the last three months of 2009, Pakistan-based extremists and al-Qaeda 
conducted at least 40 suicide terrorist attacks in major cities in Pakistan, killing about 
600 Pakistani civilians and security force personnel. Terrorists and their sympathizers 
 
7 
 
 
have demonstrated their willingness and capability to attack targets where Americans 
are known to congregate or visit. Also, since 2007, several American citizens 
throughout Pakistan have been kidnapped. 
 
 The human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Major problems include 
extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances. Additional problems include poor 
prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, widespread government corruption, rape, honor 
crimes, and widespread trafficking in persons. The military operations in the FATA and 
NWFP resulted in the deaths of approximately 1,150 civilians, and militant attacks in the 
FATA and NWFP killed 825 more civilians. The Pakistani government also maintains 
several domestic intelligence services that monitored politicians, political activists, 
suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign intelligence agents. Credible 
reports indicated that authorities routinely used wiretaps and intercepted and opened 
mail without the requisite court approval, as well as monitoring mobile phones and 
electronic messages. 
 
  In addition to al-Qaeda, the Taliban, and other insurgents and militants, foreign 
terrorist organization Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT) also operates out of Pakistan. The LT is 
the prime suspect for the November 2008 Mumbai attacks and is one of the largest and 
most proficient of the traditionally Kashmiri-focused militant groups. The LT has 
conducted a number of operations against Indian troops and civilian targets since 1993. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the Government’s concern is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign own or foreign operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.3  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection or obligation 
with his mother and siblings, who are citizens and residents of Pakistan, as well as with 
some of his in-laws, who are citizens of Pakistan. The closeness of these relationships 
is shown by Applicant’s telephone contacts with his relatives, directly or through his 
wife, his commercial and residential property in Pakistan, and family visits to Pakistan.  
 
  The threat of terrorism in Pakistan is high. Over the years, Pakistan has suffered 
from numerous terrorist attacks. Terrorists in Pakistan target U.S. interests to exploit 
and undermine U.S. national security interests. They conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as state intelligence services. There is also the possibility that terrorists, 
extremists, or criminal organizations may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or 
classified U.S. information. 
 
Applicant’s case requires the recognition that Pakistan and the United States 
have a special political and economic relationship. At the same time it is also necessary 
to recognize that Pakistan is on the front lines in the war against international and 
regional terrorism and, despite the efforts of its government, there are individuals and 
groups within Pakistan who have acted and continue to act in a hostile manner to U.S. 
interests. 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
  Four Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
10 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I conclude that only mitigating condition AG ¶ 
8(b) partially applies. AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant has developed a 
relationship and a sense of loyalty with the United States. He has continuously lived in 
the United States with his family for approximately 12 years. He and his wife are 
naturalized U.S. citizens and a significant portion of their financial and business 
interests are in the United States. Applicant’s two children are U.S.-born citizens. He 
has established himself as an American citizen and he along with his family have 
integrated into their local community. Applicant has a track record of diligent labor with 
his employer. Although this mitigating condition is partially applicable, it is insufficient to 
overcome the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
He has contacts and close relationships with his mother, his siblings in Pakistan, 
and his sister living in the United States as well as his in-laws in Canada. They all have 
contacts and a close relationship with family members in Pakistan.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply. Applicant did not establish “it is unlikely [he] will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of [his Pakistani 
family] and the interests of the U.S.” His frequent contacts and close relationships with 
mother and siblings in Pakistan could potentially force him to choose between the 
United States and Pakistan. He did not meet his burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [his relationships with his Iranian family members] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
AG ¶ 8(e) does not apply. The cumulative value of Applicant’s real estate in 
Pakistan approximates $200,000, by his estimates, and exceeds the value of his U.S.-
 
11 
 
 
based net worth. Although he testified that he plans to sell his Pakistani properties at 
some point in the future, the fact remains he owns them now and they comprise a 
substantial amount of his assets. 
 
On the other hand, there is no evidence that his family members or extended 
family members work for or associated with the Pakistani government or any news 
media. There is no evidence that the Pakistani government has approached any of his 
Pakistani family for any reason. There is no evidence that his family living in Pakistan 
currently engages in activities which would bring attention to themselves or that they are 
even aware of her work.  
 
Notwithstanding, foreign influence mitigating conditions cannot be fully applied in 
this case, and the security concerns cannot be fully mitigated because there is no 
reason for Pakistan or any group hostile to the U.S. to contact his relatives about 
Applicant until he receives access to classified information. Even taking for granted that 
his Pakistani family members currently have low-key non-controversial lifestyles, and 
that the Pakistani government or a group hostile to the U.S. has not contacted them 
about Applicant in the past, such factors are insufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns. 
 
Nothing in Applicant’s testimony or demeanor suggested he was not a loyal U.S. 
citizen and a credit to his adopted country. However, despite Applicant’s sincere 
demeanor and his assurances that he is not a security risk, the circumstances of his 
family situation argue otherwise. He was unable to put forward sufficient evidence that 
could mitigate the security discussed herein and demonstrate that he would not be 
vulnerable to foreign influence that would result in the compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
Applicant strongly averred his loyalty to the United States, he considers himself 
to be an American, and he desires to continue his work for his Government contractor 
employer. Applicant has lived in the U.S. for 12 years and has been a naturalized citizen 
for almost four years. When he became a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance to the 
United States. His wife is also a naturalized U.S. citizen and his two children are U.S. 
born citizens.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant travelled to Pakistan on three separate occasions 
during the last seven years. He has numerous immediate family members, who are 
citizens and residents of Pakistan. Applicant and his family enjoy a close relationship. 
He has strong ties of affection and or obligation to his mother and siblings. Because 
Applicant’s family members live in Pakistan, they are vulnerable to coercion or 
exploitation by Pakistan or by groups hostile to the U.S. Applicant’s statement about his 
loyalty to the United States is credible. He has the respect and trust of his employer.  
 
 Numerous circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis. 
The political situation in Pakistan is volatile and groups hostile to U.S. interests are 
active. Applicant was born in Pakistan and spent the first 40 years of his life there. He 
met and married his wife in Pakistan. He received his education through college in 
Pakistan. He has family members who are Pakistani citizens living in Pakistan and he 
and his wife remain in touch with these relatives. Applicant has frequent and non-casual 
direct and vicarious contact with his mother and his siblings living in Pakistan. He has 
significant real estate holdings in Pakistan and maintains his Pakistani citizenship. 
These cumulative factors create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Pakistani agents or terrorists may attempt to 
use Applicant’s family members living in Pakistan to obtain sensitive or classified 
information about the United States.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs1.a. – 1.e.:    Against Applicant4 
 Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.g.:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h.:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i.:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j. – 1.n.:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
4 Except findings for SOR ¶ 1.h. are amended to read, “Two of your brothers-in-law are citizens of 
Pakistan. One brother-in-law is a resident of Pakistan, and the other brother-in-law is also a citizen of 
Canada and a resident of the United States.” (See p. 4, supra.) 
