                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02404
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On December 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 22, 2009, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 22, 2010, and  responded with additional
information within the 30 days permitted.  The case was assigned to me on March 19,
2010.   Based upon a review of the case file,  pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
2
 Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy relief in May 2007 (dismissed in April 2008); (b) accumulated two charged
off debts, exceeding $7,700, as follows: creditor 1.b ($142) and creditor 1.c ($7,602);
and (c) accrued one past due account of $1,012 on a $15,249 debt.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the debts but denied
any suggestions of poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old training specialist for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
                                  
Applicant married her former spouse in May 1985 and divorced him in August
1992. (Item 5)  Applicant has been married to her current spouse since May 2008. (Item
5)  She has no children from either marriage. 
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts between 2006 and 2007.
After falling behind in her mortgage payments, she lost her home to foreclosure. (Item
5)  After exploring payment options with a legal consulting firm, she determined to
petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief from mortgage, credit card, personal loans, and
other liabilities.
Appellant filed her petition for Chapter 13 relief in May 2007. (Item 7)  She
scheduled her mortgage as a secured claim ($318,638) and listed $34,344 in
unsecured claims in her petition (see Item 6). She proposed monthly payments of $530
a month for 60 months for a gross funding of $31,800 (Item 7).  When she failed to
make her monthly payments under her proposed plan, the Chapter 13 trustee objected
to the court’s approving plan.  In the objection he filed in July 2007, the trustee noted
the absence of any (a) plan payments, (b) documented support of her claimed monthly
rental income, and (c) paystubs from her new job that the trustee had requested at the
creditors’ meeting. (Item 7) The trustee concluded that Appellant’s Chapter 13 plan
failed to satisfy the feasibility requirements of the Bankruptcy Code. (Item 7)  Stressing
Applicant’s lack of cooperation, he opposed confirmation of her plan. 
Before the bankruptcy court could rule on the trustee’s objections to Applicant’s
Chapter 13 plan, Applicant filed a motion in April 2008 to voluntarily dismiss her
Chapter 13 petition.  In turn, the bankruptcy court granted Applicant’s motion to dismiss
her petition in April 2008, without any reference to the trustee’s objections. 
  In her interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in November 2008, Applicant insisted she paid all of the claims listed in her
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. She could provide no details of her payments, however,
3
and her credit reports indicate her listed accounts in her Chapter 13 petition were either
closed or paid. (See Items 8 through 11) 
 When responding to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three listed debts without
any explanations of the payment status of the debts in question. Prior to receiving the
FORM, she provided no documentary proof of any repayment or contact with any of the
listed creditors since the dismissal of her Chapter 13 petition.
After receiving the FORM, Applicant furnished documented payment
arrangements with two of her listed creditors.  In her March 4, 2010 submission, she
attached a copy of a forbearance agreement with creditor 1.d that calls for an initial
monthly payment of $455 (payable by February 26, 2010) and monthly forbearance
payments of $295, commencing in March 2010.  The agreement contains Applicant’s
signature, but not the mortgagor’s.  Addressing her creditor 1.c debt, Applicant provided
a payment agreement that calls for a $1,000 payment by February 22, 2010 and $275 a
month, thereafter. Applicant provided no documentation of any payments made on
either of these accounts. She was advised of the need for documentary proof of
repayment or contact with any of her creditors, and was, accordingly, on notice of the
importance of providing documentation. Without some payment documentation,
Applicant cannot be credited with any payments on the accounts covered in
subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d of the SOR and admitted by Applicant in her response to
the FORM.  
Applicant claims full payment of the $142 charged off account covered in
subparagraph 1.b.  While she confirms her satisfying this $142 debt, she provided no
documentation of this payment. Absent payment documentation, Applicant cannot be
credited with any payments on this SOR-covered account either.
Applicant does not provide any information about the circumstances that
contributed to her delinquency problems.  She provided no details of the reasons for
her pursuing Chapter 13 relief in 2007, or for her failure to follow through with her
petition. She does provide earnings information in her answers to interrogatories in May
2009. (Item 6)  She reported net monthly earnings of $2,266, monthly expenses of
$1,893, and monthly debt payments of $3,542, leaving a net monthly deficit. This
reflects a considerable reduction in net monthly income from what she reported in May
2007 with her Chapter 13 petition.  In her petition, she reported $4,974 (including $650
of rental income) and $4,626 of monthly expenses. (Compare the figures provided in
Item 6 with those furnished in Item 7)  The differences are not explained.
 Without more financial information from Applicant about herself and her spouse
during the pertinent period of reported debt delinquencies and recent financial changes
in their financial fortunes, her monetary circumstances cannot be properly evaluated.
Neither her current financial circumstances nor her payment history is documented in
ways that facilitate an assessment of her payment capabilities at this time.
Applicant provided no information either about her family or work.  Although she
was afforded an opportunity to supplement the record, Applicant provided no
4
endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf. Nor did she provide any proof
of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
5
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a training specialist for a law firm.  She accumulated a number of
delinquent debts between 2006 and 2007.  Her accumulation of delinquent debts and
her past inability and unwillingness to address these debts warrant the application of
two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)).
6
Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in her latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of her debts.
Applicant’s debts are attributable to her experiencing unexplained financial
problems during the 2006-2007 time frame. She was concerned enough about her
finances to pursue Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in May 2007.  Before her plan could
be approved, however, she was required to satisfy the Chapter 13 trustee’s
documentation requests and demonstrate the feasibility of her plan. This she failed to
do, and the trustee filed an objection to the confirmation of her plan.  Before the
bankruptcy court could take any action on the trustee’s objections, Applicant moved
for a voluntary dismissal of her petition. Her voluntary request for dismissal was
approved by the bankruptcy court in April 2008.  The only three listed debts that were
included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 petition are covered by payment arrangements,
sans any documented payments to date. 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, no identifiable extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay off or otherwise resolve
her debts.  As a result, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual
acted responsibly,” is not available to Applicant.
,.
Moreover, some judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s unexplained
delinquencies and her failure to demonstrate she acted responsibly in addressing her
listed debts once she her Chapter 13 petition was dismissed.  See ISCR Case 03-
01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004).  Not only are her listed debt delinquencies
ongoing, but she has failed to document any payments on them.  Probative evidence
of mitigation is not demonstrated by Applicant based on available documentation in
the record.         
                                          
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is
required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While
the principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also implicit
in financial cases.  Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve
her debts raises security-significant concerns about whether the applicant has
demonstrated the trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her accumulation of delinquent debts. Since her
7
Chapter 13 dismissal in April 2008, she has not established any track record for
paying her listed debts.  Resolution of her delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite
to her regaining control of her  finances and mitigating financial concerns.
While underemployment conditions might have played a considerable role in
her accumulation of delinquent debts between 2006 and 2007, Applicant failed to
provide any explanatory material for consideration.  Endorsements and performance
evaluations might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of
her overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided. Overall, clearance eligibility
assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of information available for
consideration in this record does not enable her to establish judgment and trust levels
sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of her accumulation of delinquent
debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, her lack of any explanations for her debt accruals,
and her failure to provide any documented payments on any of the listed delinquency
debts in the SOR, it is too soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s
ability to repay her debts and restore her finances to acceptable levels commensurate
with the minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.d.  
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the 2(a) factors enumerated in the AGs.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, and conditions any deliberate attempt to
conceal adverse information about her debts listed above, I make the following formal
findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.d:                 Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
