 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05813 
                                                            )                                                             
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on March 25, 2009. He was interviewed about his financial issues 
by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on 
June 23, 2009. On December 7, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA took this action under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a hearing before an 
administrative judge. His answer was undated. DOHA received his answer on January 
4, 2010. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2010. To ensure that Applicant 
had sufficient time under the Directive to prepare his case,1 his hearing, initially 
scheduled for February 24, 2010, was postponed and rescheduled for March 24, 2010. I 
convened the hearing as rescheduled to consider whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses and introduced three exhibits, which were marked Exs. 
1 through 3 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and called no witnesses. He submitted no exhibits for admission to the record. 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
March 31, 2010, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional information for 
the record. On March 31, 2010, Applicant requested an extension of time until April 5, 
2010 to provide additional information for the record. I granted Applicant’s request. 
Applicant timely submitted documents comprising nine exhibits. I marked the exhibits as 
Exs. A through I, and they were admitted to the record without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on April 1, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the four allegations. His admissions are included herein as findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old, married, and the father of three young children. 
Applicant’s wife is a homemaker, and she is not employed outside the home. Applicant 
has been employed as a project manager by a government contractor since October 
2008. He seeks a security clearance for the first time. While his current duties do not 
require a security clearance, his employer is sponsoring him for a clearance because, in 
the future, he wants to task Applicant with projects that require a security clearance. 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 28-36.) 
 
 In 1999, Applicant received a Bachelor of Science degree in construction 
management. From 2003 until 2008, he owned and operated his own construction 
company, which employed six people. (Ex. 1; Tr. 28-29, 33-34, 74.) 
 
 In about 2000, Applicant purchased a residence, where he and his family lived 
until he sold the home in November 2009. When he sold his home, Applicant realized a 
profit of $12,000. (Ex. 3 at 15, 26-35; Tr. 37-38.) 
 
 
1 See ¶ E3.1.8. of Enclosure 3 of DoD Directive 5220.6 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 In December 2006 and August 2007, Applicant purchased two houses as 
investment properties. He intended to use his construction skills to repair or improve the 
properties and then sell or “flip” them. (Ex. 3 at 11-12; Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 His first purchase was half of a duplex house. The second unit in the building 
was not habitable and had been abandoned for ten years. Applicant’s ownership in the 
property was secured by a mortgage of $93,500. His monthly payments on the 
mortgage were $900. Applicant was unable to sell the property. When he decided to 
rent the property, he was unable to find reliable tenants. The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.c. that 
Applicant was 120 days past due in paying the mortgage and owed the creditor 
approximately $10,000. Applicant admitted the delinquent debt. At his hearing, he 
reported that his mother, who is a real estate investor, had purchased the property from 
him. In a post-hearing submission, he provided documentation establishing that the 
property had been purchased by his mother and his mortgage obligation had been 
satisfied in full. (Ex. 3 at 11; Ex. F; Ex. G; Ex. H; Ex. I; Tr. 44-47.) 
 
 The second house that Applicant purchased as an investment property was 
secured by a mortgage of $270,000. His monthly mortgage payment was $1,800. After 
renovating the property, Applicant tried to sell it in March or April of 2008, but he was 
unable to do so. In November 2008, he executed a one-year lease-to-purchase 
agreement with tenants. The tenants failed to follow through with the agreement, and 
Applicant had them evicted in November 2009. In about January 2010, Applicant 
contacted his lender to discuss a short sale of the property.2 As of the date of his 
hearing, he had not found a realtor to assist him with the short sale. The SOR alleged at 
¶ 1.d. that Applicant was 120 days or more past due on his mortgage payments and 
owed $9,000 to the creditor holding the mortgage on the second property. Applicant 
admitted the delinquent debt. (Ex. 3 at 12; Ex. D; 47-53.)  
 
 When he purchased his two investment properties, Applicant was confident that 
he could renovate them and sell them for a profit. In November 2007, however, 
Applicant’s construction business began to feel the effects of the national downturn in 
the housing market. In January 2008, he lost a large contract with an apartment 
complex. He carried on with smaller projects, but, by March 2008, he became financially 
strapped and had difficulty paying his bills. He closed his business in July 2008 and 
looked for other work. (Tr. 34-35, 76.) 
 
 In addition to his two delinquent mortgages, Applicant is responsible for two 
delinquent credit card debts. In September 2009, one of the credit card creditors 
obtained a judgment against Applicant for $5,094. The debt, which Applicant admitted, 
is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. In November 2009, the creditor obtained a court order to 
execute a levy against Applicant’s property, and $4,244 was removed from Applicant’s 
bank account to satisfy part of the judgment. The creditor accepted Applicant’s offer to 
satisfy the remainder of the debt with $100 monthly payments. In a post-hearing 
 
2 Applicant testified that he was “upside down” on the mortgage. The mortgage balance was $272,000, 
and the property was appraised at approximately $250,000. (Tr. 27-28.) 
 
4 
 
 
submission, Applicant provided documents that established that he had made $100 
payments to the creditor in November and December of 2009 and in March of 2010. 
(Ex. 2; Ex. B; Ex. C; Tr. 53-55.) 
 
 In 1995, Applicant acquired a credit card that he later used to purchase supplies 
and materials for his construction business. He paid the creditor approximately $700 a 
month on the account and estimated that the high balance on the account was 
approximately $14,000 in August or September of 2008. In March 2008, when his 
business was falling off, Applicant contacted the creditor to state that he could no longer 
stay current on the account. The creditor advised him that he could pay the whole debt 
at once or continue to pay $700 a month. Since neither option was possible for 
Applicant, he asked the creditor if he could reduce his monthly payments to $200 a 
month. The creditor told Applicant he could make lower payments but his interest rates 
would not be cut, and the account would continue to grow. SOR ¶ 1.b. alleges that this 
account is currently in charged-off status and that Applicant owes the creditor $23,000. 
Applicant admitted the debt, although he believed the debt had grown because the 
creditor continues to charge interest on the unpaid debt. Applicant has not been in 
contact with the creditor since March or April of 2009. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3 at 10; Tr. 55-58.) 
 
 Applicant’s current net monthly income is $5,300. His monthly fixed expenses of 
$2,750 are broken down as follows: rent, $1,650; groceries, $300; clothing, $100; 
utilities, $250; car expenses, $300; life/other insurance, $50; and miscellaneous, $100. 
Additionally, each month Applicant is responsible for a mortgage payment of $1,800 on 
the house he purchased as an investment in August 2007. He also pays $600 each 
month on a vehicle he is purchasing, and he invests $200 in his 401(k) plan. Applicant 
has a negative net remainder of $50.  (Ex. 3 at 5; Tr. 61-64.) 
 
 Applicant’s employer provided a letter of reference on his behalf. He stated that 
he found Applicant to be honest, conscientious, and an effective member of the project 
management team. He also observed:  
 
I am aware of his financial issues and believe they are primarily due to the 
economic crisis that affected many Americans. [Applicant] dared to follow 
his dreams and unfortunately was not able to achieve all of them. He has 
been extremely resilient and has not appeared defeated or forlorn. He has 
not allowed his financial trouble to interfere with the performance of his 
work [with this company]. 
 
(Ex. E.)      
                                                         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
5 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable to 
pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20 (d)) Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e))   
 
 
7 
 
 
In December 2006 and August 2007, Applicant purchased two houses to 
renovate and sell. Beginning in about November 2007, Applicant, who was self- 
employed and owned a construction company, experienced financial uncertainties and 
loss of income resulting from the downturn in the housing market. In July 2008, he was 
forced to close his business. In October 2008, Applicant acquired his present job. At his 
hearing, he presented documentation to establish that he had resolved one of his 
mortgage debts and had a payment plan in place to satisfy one of his credit card debts. 
. 
Despite these good-faith efforts to satisfy two of his debts, Applicant has 
significant unresolved delinquent debt. He is $9,000 in arrears on a mortgage of over 
$270,000 on the remaining house he purchased as an investment, and to date, he has 
been unable to initiate action on a short sale of the property. His $23,000 debt to a 
credit card company also remains unresolved. He has a negative monthly net 
remainder, leaving few resources for paying his delinquent debts and meeting 
unforeseen emergencies. It is not clear at his time that Applicant will be able to manage 
his finances and avoid financial delinquency in the future. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(b) 
and 20(d) apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. However, I also conclude 
that AG ¶¶ 20(a), AG 20(c), and 20(e) do not apply in his case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a competent and 
thoughtful person who took some financial risks and purchased properties he hoped to 
renovate and sell. After he renovated his properties, he was unable to sell them when 
the housing market took a serious downturn and he was unable to find buyers for his 
properties. Moreover, he incurred operating expenses that he could not satisfy when his 
business was affected by the economic downturn. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant receives credit for taking action to resolve two of his debts. However, 
these actions are recent, and two other significant debts remain unresolved. Applicant 
has not yet demonstrated a track record showing consistent payment of his delinquent 
debts. He needs more time to resolve his outstanding delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant can reapply for a security clearance one year after the date that this 
decision becomes final. If he wishes, he can produce new evidence that addresses the 
Government’s current security concerns.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:              For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
                                                        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
