1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 09-04526
SSN: ------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence
shows Applicant has a history of financial problems. The main cause of her financial
problems was her use of crystal methamphetamine during 2003–2004. She has had
full-time employment since mid-2006. She did not present any documentary evidence
supporting her claim that she has entered into a debt-consolidation plan to resolve her
more than $12,000 in delinquent debt. The record contains insufficient evidence to
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from her history of
financial problems. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against
Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They
replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting evidence, which3
will be identified as exhibits in this decision.  
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on November 19,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion, and she requested a decision
without a hearing. Accordingly, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On January 13, 2010, the Agency submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file3
of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant and received by her on January
26, 2010. She then had 30 days to submit a documentary response setting forth
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, but she did not respond
within the 30-day period. The case was assigned to me March 29, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 28-year-old laboratory technician for a science and technology
organization. She is married with two young children, a daughter born in 2005 and a son
in 2009. Also, she has two stepchildren who reside in another state. 
Her employment history includes full-time employment dating back to August
2006, except for two periods of unemployment. The first period of unemployment was
for about nine months in 2004. The second period took place during January 2005 to
August 2006. She began her current job in March 2008. 
 Exhibit 6. 4
 Exhibits 6, 7, 8, and 9. 5
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a6
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.7
3
Applicant has a history of financial problems (delinquent consumer debt). During
the background investigation, she explained that the main cause of her financial
problems was her use of crystal methamphetamine during the period November 2003 to
July 2004.  She stated that she used the drug daily during this period. Her drug abuse4
resulted in indebtedness and caused her problems at work. She stopped the drug
abuse in 2004, when she learned she was pregnant with her first child. 
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts with various creditors for a total of
approximately $12,900. The delinquent debts are established by Applicant’s admissions
and the information in the credit reports.  In her Answer to the SOR, she admitted the5
five delinquent debts as well as that her past drug abuse resulted in her inability to meet
her financial obligations. She claimed that her debts were consolidated, and she is now
working to pay them off. She stated that she had paid $1,357 to date, and that she
planned to continue making a monthly payment of $189. 
She did not present documentary evidence showing she has paid, settled, or
resolved any of the debts. She did not present documentary evidence of the debt-
consolidation plan. She did not present documentary evidence showing her overall
financial condition as well as her ability to repay the delinquent debts at issue. And she
did not present documentary evidence showing her income or her husband’s income. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As6
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,7
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 14
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).15
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.16
4
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An8
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  9
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting10
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An11
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate12
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme13
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.14
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15
The Adjudicative Guidelines set forth the relevant standards to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the Government. The Government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the16
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 17
 AG ¶ 18.  18
 AG ¶ 19(a).  19
 AG ¶ 19(c). 20
 AG ¶ 19(f).21
 AG ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 22
5
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant17
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  18
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The record here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This history raises concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within19 20
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are more than sufficient to establish these two
disqualifying conditions, and they suggest financial irresponsibility as well. In addition,
the history raises concerns because her financial problems were linked to her drug
abuse during 2003–2004.    21
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns.22
The six conditions are as follows: 
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
6
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
The most pertinent here are ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d), and both are discussed below.
Applicant receives credit in mitigation under ¶ 20(b). It is most probable that her
financial problems stem, in part, from the two periods of unemployment. The credit is
limited somewhat, however, because she has been working full-time since mid-2006, a
period of nearly four years.
Applicant receives no credit in mitigation under ¶ 20(d). The evidence does not
show that she has made a good-faith effort to repay her delinquent debts. Applicant’s
statements—unsupported by reliable documentary evidence—that she has entered into
a debt-consolidation plan and has paid more than $1,300 cannot be given much weight.
Her unsupported statements deserve the same weight as mere promises to pay in the
future. 
Although there is some evidence in mitigation, the credit in mitigation is
insufficient to overcome the security concerns. Her financial problems date to several
years ago. But she has worked full-time since mid-2006, making little progress in
resolving her financial problems. Looking forward, it is too soon to rule out the likelihood
of additional financial problems. What is missing here is a well-established track record
of repayment of her delinquent debts. Although she may have good intentions, her track
record at this point is insufficient to make any safe predictive judgments about the
future.   
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s ongoing
financial problems justify current doubts about her judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, these doubts are
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).23
7
consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence.23
Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
