                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-04747 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 7, 2009, Applicant submitted his electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). On October 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and D (Sexual Behavior). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 5, 2009. He answered 
the SOR in writing on November 17, 2009, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on November 19, 2009. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 8, 2010, and I received the case 
assignment on January 13, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 29, 
2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 22, 2010. The Government 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted Exhibits A through I, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 4, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ”a,” after “1” in 
Paragraph 2(a), alleging the same facts in ¶ 2.a as alleged in ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 8, 9) Applicant 
did not object to the amendment. (Tr. 9) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1 and ¶ 
2 of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 50 years old, married, and has three children, including two 
daughters. He works as an engineering manager with a defense contractor. He is 
separated from his wife since February 2008, and lives with his grandmother, providing 
her with help in her home. He supports his wife and two daughters, both of whom are 
attending college. His oldest daughter is a senior in college and is 23 years old. His 
youngest daughter is a 20-year-old sophomore in college and has a child of her own. 
His son is married, employed, and self-supporting. (Tr. 35-37, 39, 40, 41, 49, 50, 57, 60, 
64, 65; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant sexually molested his two daughters in 2000 to 2003 multiple times 
each while they were sleeping. The daughters were 12 and 10 years old at the time of 
the incidents. The oldest daughter was molested at least 12 times between 2000 and 
2001. The youngest daughter was molested at least 48 times between 2001 and 2003. 
Applicant molested his daughters by fondling their breasts and pubic areas, including 
digital penetration of the younger daughter. Applicant ceased his molestations of each 
girl when the girls awoke during the fondling incidents. Applicant knew his actions were 
wrong, but thinking his daughters did not know what he was doing to them because they 
were asleep was “good.” Between 2003 and 2008 Applicant did not seek any sexual 
offender treatment. He was of the opinion that during the 2000 to 2008 period he and 
his daughters “were fairly close” in their relationship. In February 2008, the oldest 
daughter reported the incidents to Applicant’s wife. His wife did not know about this 
misconduct until told by her daughter. When confronted by his wife, Applicant confessed 
his actions and his wife asked him to leave their home. (Tr. 40, 42-50, 61-62; Exhibits 1-
4) 
 
The local police arrested Applicant in September 2008 on two counts of sexual 
imposition under his home state’s law. Applicant testified he turned himself in before the 
 
3 
 
 
police came to get him. The charges are misdemeanors under the state law. Applicant 
was convicted on his pleas of the criminal offenses on November 18, 2008. Applicant 
received a sentence of 60 days in jail on Count I, with all days suspended on condition 
of good behavior for two years. Applicant received credit for one day time served in jail 
and two years probation. He is required to register as a sex offender for 15 years under 
state law. The court ordered Applicant not to have any contact with the victims, his 
daughters. On November 24, 2008, that restriction in the court order was vacated at the 
request of his daughters who were his victims. His relationship with his oldest daughter 
is strained at the present time. Applicant thinks his relationship with the younger 
daughter is “pretty good” because they visit with “each other regularly” and he plays with 
his granddaughter often. Applicant thinks his marital relationship is improving and he 
would be allowed to live in the marital home again, even with his granddaughter in the 
house. He was also required to undergo one year of sexual offender group counseling 
from January 2009 to January 2010. On Count II, Applicant received 60 days in jail and 
court costs. The court ordered two years of probation from November 18, 2008, and the 
same conditions as under Count I. (Tr. 34, 38, 49-59; Exhibits 1-4) 
 
Applicant submitted his employee evaluations from 2003 to 2008 in support of his 
contention that he is a hardworking and knowledgeable employee. He has worked for 
his employer or its predecessors for the past 29 years. He also submitted seven 
character references from co-workers and his pastor. Applicant submitted seven awards 
and recognition certificates he received. He submitted a copy of the court order 
releasing him from his probation term early for good behavior. The order is dated 
January 5, 2010. He was initially ordered to be on probation until November 2010. 
Applicant submitted a December 16, 2009, report from the sexual offender program 
showing he completed the “offense specific treatment program for sexual offenders.” 
Applicant attended the program from January 6, 2009, to December 15, 2009. The 
program director opined that Applicant is at low-risk to repeat his behavior based on the 
Sex Offender Needs Assessment Rating (SONAR) and a voice stress analysis. There 
was no foundation laid by Applicant for either of these tests or the credentials of 
examiners, and therefore, the tests are given little weight. (Tr. 25, 53-56; Exhibits A to I) 
 
Applicant has a secret clearance, which he has held since 1981. It has never 
been revoked or suspended. (Tr. 37, 38) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical ,and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 states the security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
 
5 
 
 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. All four conditions apply to Applicant: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and, 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Applicant took advantage of his fatherhood role and sexually molested his two 
daughters over a three-year period of time from 2000 to 2003. These actions are 
criminal. He was convicted on his guilty plea of two misdemeanor charges under his 
state’s law.  AG ¶ 13 (a) applies. 
 
 Molestation of Applicant’s pre-teen daughters repeatedly over a three-year period 
shows a pattern of compulsive and high-risk sexual behavior by Applicant. He was not 
able to stop or control his misconduct during that time period. AG ¶ 13 (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior, which was criminal and contrary to societal norms, makes 
him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, and duress. His behavior was unknown to his 
wife until she was told by her adult daughter. AG ¶ 13 (c) applies. 
 
 Molesting a person’s underage daughters shows that person cannot control his 
impulses. Applicant’s actions demonstrated a serious lack of discretion and judgment. 
He perpetrated his molestation in the night when his daughters were asleep. AG ¶ 13 
(d) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 14 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
mitigating condition may potentially apply. The others are clearly not applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
  
 
6 
 
 
 According to Applicant, the last incident of sexual molestation of his two 
daughters  occurred seven years ago. However, it was not discovered until 2008, when 
his oldest daughter disclosed the conduct. Applicant is required to register as a sexual 
offender for a further 14 years. His misconduct is recent, being in the past seven to ten 
years,. The sexual activity was not infrequent and not under unusual circumstances 
because it took place multiple times over a three-year period. His evaluator opined that 
Applicant had a low-risk of recidivism for this sexual molestation, but did not provide a 
foundation or an explicit explanation of the criteria used to make that finding. I give it 
little credence. Applicant’s behavior was egregious and ongoing. It had a seriously 
injurious effect on his daughters, and casts great doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 14 (b) does not apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes five conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three conditions apply to Applicant: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant committed two serious offenses. His actions, occurring numerous times 
over a three-year period, were perpetrated on trusting and loving daughters. Applicant 
admitted he committed the offenses. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c) apply. 
 
 Applicant had his probation terminated 11 months early. He was required to 
serve 24 months from November 2008. However, he is required to register as a sexual 
offender for the next 14 years. That registration with the state authorities makes him 
subject to state controls and prohibitions on sex offenders during that term. If he 
commits another sexual offense during the next 14 years, he can be punished by the 
state court. AG ¶ 31(d) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. From 
these four conditions, two may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
7 
 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
  Applicant committed the acts in 2000 to 2003, but they were not reported until 
2008. Too little time has elapsed since the behavior was discovered to apply this 
mitigating condition. The circumstances were unusual only in that Applicant perpetrated 
his sexual acts upon his sleeping pre-teen daughters, and that unusual aspect is not in 
Applicant’s favor. His actions cast serious and current doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 32 (a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant completed his court-ordered sexual offender treatment program. He 
has a good employment record for 29 years and nothing has changed there in the past 
eight years. Applicant has not repeated his behavior, nor does he have the type of 
access to his daughters he had as their father when they were minors and all lived in 
the same house. However, these treatment activities and the mere lack of sexual 
molestation actions in the past six years are insufficient evidence of successful 
rehabilitation under AG ¶ 32 (d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Sexually molesting one’s own 
 
8 
 
 
children is very serious misconduct. Applicant knew what he was doing when he did it. 
The conduct happened frequently, and was only discovered recently. There is 
inadequate evidence of rehabilitation or permanent behavioral changes. Applicant’s 
concupiscence, lust and lack of judgment motivated his conduct between 2000 and 
2003, which he never disclosed or admitted until his daughter came forward in 2008. 
Applicant never came forward to disclose voluntarily his actions. He put the burden of 
disclosure on his daughters. These actions by Applicant show a serious lack of 
judgment and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his sexual behavior and 
criminal activity. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
