                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02593
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 13, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire For Sensitive Positions on October 9,
2008.  (Government Exhibit 4).  On September 25, 2009, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued
after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on October 13, 2009, in which
she elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on November 23, 2009.  The Applicant was instructed to submit
information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant
received the FORM on November 30, 2009, and she submitted a reply.  The case was
assigned to the undersigned for resolution on January 11, 2010.  Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
2
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of
certain facts concerning the current political conditions in Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan.  Applicant made no objection.  The request and the attached documents
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record. The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 28 years of age and is employed as a
Program Analyst.  She seeks a security clearance in connection with her employment in
the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant admits to each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
She was born in another country in 1982, although her parents erroneously recorded
her official birth place as Pakistan or Afghanistan as reflected on her passport and
citizenship documents.  (Government Exhibit 4).  The Applicant’s father was born in and
is a citizen of Afghanistan, and is a high government official.  In the early 1980's, the
Applicant’s father left Afghanistan and was living in another country when the Applicant
was born.  In 1984, the Applicant and her family moved to the United States.  Her father
worked in the United States until 2001, when he went back to Afghanistan to work for
the Afghan government.   
Applicant communicates telephonically with her father approximately six times
per year and at least once a month by e-mail.  Applicant’s father travels to the United
States on his green card twice a year and the Applicant visits with him then.
(Government Exhibit 3.)    
  In 2003, the Applicant traveled to Afghanistan to visit her father.  She states that
while in Afghanistan she was under security and did not travel alone.  During that visit
she states that she did not come in contact with anyone that she thought was
suspicious.  (Government Exhibit 3.)    
The Applicant indicates that she has lived in the United States for most of her life
and was educated here.  She has a consistent employment record and no criminal
record.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM.)  She states that she has no divided loyalties,
nor does she with sympathize with the Afghan government or any other foreign
government.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the country of
Afghanistan.  Afghanistan is a problematic region.  The country is currently fighting an
3
insurgency with assistance from the United States.  Despite the new democratic
government that took over in 2004, the insurgents remain strong and Afghanistan’s
human rights record has remained poor.  Numerous people, including civilians, have
been killed by security and factional forces, as well as by terrorists and insurgents,
including the Taliban and Al Qaida.  While progress has been made, the Taliban led
insurgency remains strong and resilient.  No part of Afghanistan is safe or immune from
violence. 
The United States Department of State released information dated April 21,
2009, stating that recent intelligence reporting indicate that insurgents are planning to
conduct a suicide attack against United States personnel in the Serena Hotel in Kabul
City.  Kabul, in particular, has seen a rise in militant attacks, including rocket attacks,
vehicle borne IED’s and suicide bombings.  Overall, the State Department has declared
that the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part
of Afghanistan is immune from violence.
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
4
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress, and;
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
5
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's status and her
ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency of proof
of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the Applicant
presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who may be subject to foreign influence, or has foreign
connections, may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to
the interests of the United States.  The Government must be able to place a high
degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and
regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSION
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
The evidence shows that the Applicant’s father is a citizen of Afghanistan and a
high government official.  Applicant maintains a close and continuing relationship with
her father in Afghanistan as evidence by her regular communication by telephone and
e-mail with him.  The risk of this strong foreign family tie is heightened by the fact that
the Applicant’s father has connections to the Afghan government by virtue of his
employment.  Furthermore, Applicant’s travel to Afghanistan places her in a vulnerable
position to be subject to coercion, exploitation and/or pressure by the Afghan
government.  It is also noted that the current political situation in Afghanistan elevates
the cause for concern in this case. The United States is directly involved with combat
operations in Afghanistan and there is a clear threat of hostility and terrorism against the
United States.  In this case, the possibilities are great that the Applicant may at some
point be placed in a position to be forced to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group organization, or government and the interests of the United States.       
 
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  I have
considered Mitigating Condition 8.(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign
persons, the country in which these person are located, or the positions or activities of
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization or government and the interests of the U.S., and its applicability in this
case.  However, under the facts presented, there is insufficient evidence in the record to
find that it is unlikely that the Applicant will ever be placed in a position to be forced to
6
choose between the interests of a foreign government and the United States.  Simply
stated, Applicant’s relationship with her father, a foreign national government official,
and her regular contact with him creates a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
Furthermore, there is no evidence in support of mitigation under the whole-
person analysis.  The Applicant has submitted no favorable recommendations or
sufficient documentation to support security clearance eligibility.  I have considered the
“whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth
under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole person assessment of
untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack a candor, and an unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard classified information.
  
 The Applicant’s regular foreign contact with her father infers a strong bond of
affection with him that could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, there is a
possibility of foreign influence that exists that could create the potential for conduct
resulting in the compromise of classified information.  Thus, I find that the Applicant is
vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline
B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, she has failed to meet her ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline
B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.: Against the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
