                                                              
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
     
In the matter of:                                             ) 
                                                                      ) 
 ---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-00431    
           ----------------------                                 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 Decision 
______________ 
 
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge: 
 
History of Case  
 
On July 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security  
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 17, 2009, and requested a decision 
on the record.  At the government’s request, the case was converted to a hearing.  The 
case was assigned to me on September 11, 2009, and was scheduled for hearing on 
October 8, 2009.  A hearing was convened on the scheduled date, and for good cause 
shown was continued (Tr. 9-11).  The case was rescheduled for hearing on December 
10, 2009.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date. At the hearing, the government's 
case consisted of five exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and seven 
exhibits.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 22, 2009.  Based upon a review 
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues and Rulings 
 
Before the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend 
subparagraph 1.a of the SOR to substitute the date of 1982 for 1972 and subparagraph 
2.a to change the date of 1977 to 1980.  For good cause shown, Department Counsel’s 
motion requests were granted.  Applicant admitted the allegations as amended. 
 
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the 
record with chips commemorating 18 months of sobriety.  For good cause shown, 
Applicant was afforded seven days to supplement the record.  Within the time permitted, 
Applicant documented his receipt of chips commemorating 18 months of sobriety.  
Applicant’s submission was admitted for consideration as exhibit H. 
    
Summary of Pleadings 
 
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant: (a) consumed alcohol 
to excess and to the point of intoxication between 1972 (amended to 1982) and February 
2008; (b) was arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in 
1985 under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) and awarded 25 days of 
correctional study and reduction in rank; (c) participated in a substance abuse treatment  
and detoxification program operated by a charitable organization (S Services) in 1997; 
(d) participated in a 28-day outpatient substance abuse program in 2000; (e) participated 
in a substance abuse first step program (sponsored by the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (DVA)) between March 2008 and April 2008, where he was diagnosed with 
alcohol dependence and cannabis abuse; and (f) experienced negative affects in his 
marriage and loss of jobs attributable to his abuse of alcohol. 
 
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant: (a) used and 
purchased marijuana and cocaine on multiple occasions between 1977 (amended to 
1980) and February 2008; (b) was diagnosed with cocaine dependence in 2008; (c) used 
marijuana frequently while in the U.S. Marine Corps (between 1983 and 1989), (d) tested 
positive for marijuana in 1986 and 2006, respectively; (e) was diagnosed with cocaine 
dependence and cannabis abuse; (f) was charged with marijuana possession in August 
1994 (dismissed) and November 2006; (g) was treated for substance abuse in 1997 and 
2000, respectively; and (h) used marijuana on multiple occasions while possessing a 
DoD security clearance and serving in the U.S. Marine Corps. 
  
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant falsified his security 
clearance application (e-QIP) in August 2008 by (a) omitting his drug-related arrests in 
1994 and 2006 and (b) understating his marijuana use. 
 2
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations, except for 
the date corrections he cited.  He added explanations. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
       
Applicant is 44-year-old security professional for a defense contractor who seeks 
a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are 
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow. 
 
Applicant is unmarried and has no children.  After high school, he enlisted in the 
Marine Corps and served for four years of active duty (between 1983 and 1987) and two 
years in the active reserves (see ex. 1; Tr. 48-49).  During his active service, he was 
assigned to an air and naval gunfire company and belonged to a rapid deployable 
forward operating airborne unit (Tr. 49-50). He received his honorable discharge in 1989 
(Tr. 51). 
 
Applicant’s alcohol and drug history 
 
At a very early age, Applicant was introduced to alcohol.  By the time he was 13, 
he was consuming a six-pack of beer a week in social situations. While in high school, 
he regularly consumed alcohol at abusive levels on a virtually daily basis (see ex. 4).  He 
graduated from high school in 1981, and soon enlisted in the Marine Corps. (see exs. 1 
and 3; Tr. 62). 
 
During his active duty tour in the Marine Corps, Applicant developed serious 
alcohol and drug abuse problems.  His medical records reveal he consumed alcohol 
regularly when not on duty (see ex. 4).  In 1985, he was charged with drunk driving 
under the UCMJ, and was awarded article 15 punishment and sentenced to 25 days in 
correctional study, and reduced in rank (see exs. 3 through 5).  Despite his alcohol and 
drug problems during his active military tour of duty, Applicant continued to function at 
acceptable levels and received numerous awards and commendations recognizing his 
contributions to his command. 
       
Following his discharge from active military service in September 1989 (see ex. 
C), Applicant continued to abuse alcohol on a regular basis.  Between 1982 and 
February 2009, he abused alcohol daily, both on the job and at home (ex. 4).  In 1997, 
he turned to a recognized charitable organization (S Services) for guidance in controlling 
his drinking.  Records document that he participated in an outpatient substance abuse 
program operated by HL. He completed this program and was able to remain sober for 
the duration of the program and for about six months thereafter (see ex. 4; Tr. 56-57), 
before returning to abusive drinking. Because of his drinking, Applicant encountered 
considerable difficulties in his marriage and in holding jobs.  His continued drinking also 
contributed to serious strains in his relationships with his father and siblings (see ex. 4). 
 
 3
Applicant admitted himself to a 28-day substance abuse program offered by a 
recognized substance abuse facility in 2000 (Tr. 58).  It is not clear from the record what 
this program entailed and how Applicant progressed in the program.  
 
Besides alcohol, Applicant abused drugs over a period of many years.  He was 
introduced to marijuana when he was about 14 years of age (ex. 3).  He continued using 
it on a recurrent basis between 1980 and February 2008 (exs. 3 and 4). Typically, he 
smoked marijuana with friends and used the drug throughout his active duty military tour.  
His frequent use of marijuana in the Marine Corps contributed to six reductions in rank 
and several forfeitures of pay (see ex. 4).  Records document that he used marijuana 
continuously between November 1983 and December 1989 while in the Marine Corps. 
and holding a security clearance (see exs. 3 and 5; Tr. 66-67).  Applicant freely 
acknowledges that his use of illegal drugs violated DoD’s drug policy (Tr. 67). Records 
reflect that he tested positive for marijuana in 1986, and again in 2006 (see ex. 3; Tr. 47). 
   
In 1989, Applicant was introduced to cocaine.  Between 1989 and December 
2008, he used cocaine with varying frequency.  Except for an extended period of non- 
use between 1996 and 2000, he used cocaine regularly between 1980 and February 
2008, a period of almost 28 years (exs. 3 and 5; Tr. 63).  
 
Over the course of his use of both drugs (marijuana and cocaine), Applicant 
occasionally purchased small quantities of both drugs for his personal use and sharing 
with friends (Tr. 64).  However, he never purchased nor sold drugs for the purpose of 
producing a profit.  Twice, he was arrested and charged with possession of illegal drugs: 
once in August 1994 (charge later dismissed) and again in November 2006 (dismissed) 
(see exs. 3 and 5; Tr. 45-47). 
 
In March 2008, Applicant enrolled in a VA-sponsored First Step program. This 
was an inpatient program designed to treat admitted patients for substance abuse (both 
drugs and alcohol) over the course of the 90 days allotted to the program (see exs. 3 and 
4; Tr. 59-60).  Upon admission, Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence, 
cocaine dependence, and cannabis abuse. His provider-designed treatment regimen 
included daily sessions of milieu therapy (including community meetings), group therapy, 
psycho-educational classes (e.g., relapsed prevention, 12-steps, communication, and 
cognitive coping), recreational therapy, and individual drug and alcohol counseling.  His 
hospital report reveals he encountered First Step problems in his associations with his 
First Step peers (ex. 4).  His records note that he sometimes left the organized group 
setting to isolate with a female member of the group.   
 
After spending just a little over a month in the VA program, Applicant was 
discharged from the program, as the result of reported verbal altercations with one of his 
peers in the program (see ex. 5; Tr. 59-60). Notwithstanding the objectionable behavior 
of the other patient in the cited exchange, Applicant was determined by the VA’s hospital 
staff to be the most culpable party and was discharged from the program prior to 
completion due to aggressive behavior and the altercation with another patient of the 
community (ex. 4).  
 4
 
Prior to his discharge from the VA’s First Step program, Applicant was advised to 
maintain his abstinence from alcohol and drugs after his discharge, attend a local 
housing shelter, attend aftercare meetings, attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
sponsored 12-step meetings and other peer-oriented support groups in the community, 
and continue to work with Next Step groups seeking employment and vocational 
assistance (ex. 4). He was discharged in April 2008 with no reported change in his 
diagnoses. 
 
Since his discharge from the VA’s First Step program, Applicant has maintained 
his abstinence from alcohol and drugs and is committed to a lifestyle of permanent 
abstinence (ex. 4). Applicant’s substance abuse coordinator with the VA First Step 
program he was involved with in 2008 credited him with making an excellent transition 
from the VA’s program to the clean and sober transitional housing system it operates on 
campus (see ex. F).  This VA coordinator stressed Applicant’s continued participation in 
VA aftercare groups and individual case management, his regular attendance at 12-Step 
meetings with the aid of his sponsor, his local church affiliation, and his service as a 
source of support and inspiration for his fellow Veterans (ex. F; Tr. 81-82).  Applicant 
assures he has not consumed any alcohol since February 2008, and provides chips that 
commemorate his sobriety since February 2008 (a period of almost 22 months) with the 
support of his recovery programs (see ex. H; Tr. 80-82). Applicant’s assurances of 
sustained sobriety since February 2008 (Tr. 54-55) are credible ones and are accepted. 
 
Other VA staff members who are familiar with Applicant’s progress since his 
discharge from the VA’s First Step program vouchsafe for his commitment to sober 
living, involvement with outpatient therapy groups, and regular meetings with his AA 
sponsor (see ex. F).  They make optimistic assessments of his ability to stay sober in the 
foreseeable future.  
 
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions and understatements 
 
Asked to complete an e-QIP in August 2008, Applicant omitted his drug-related 
arrests in 1985 and 2006, and understated his use of marijuana and cocaine (see ex.1). 
He attributed his omissions and understated drug use to misunderstanding how much 
background information the e-QIP questions were intended to elicit (Tr. 70).  When 
interviewed by an OPM agent in November 2008, he voluntarily disclosed his arrests and 
more extensive drug use without any prompting from the agent (see ex. 3; Tr. 45, 70-71). 
 
Applicant’s explanations of misunderstanding and confusion are not very 
convincing.  He impresses as a very intelligent and experienced ex-Marine who was 
clearly embarrassed over his transgressions with alcohol and drugs and determined to 
limit as much adverse information about his abuse of alcohol and drugs as he could 
plausibly achieve without exposing himself to detection.  
 
To his credit, Applicant was completely honest and forthcoming about his alcohol 
and drug abuse with his military and VA providers who treated his extensive alcohol and 
 5
drug addictions in March and April 2008.  And when he appeared for a scheduled OPM 
interview in August 2008, he promptly disclosed all of his drug-related arrest history and 
involvement with drugs without any prompting by the interviewing OPM agent.  
Applicant’s credible corrections are accepted upon consideration of all of the facts and 
circumstances. 
 
Endorsements 
 
Applicant’s direct supervisor and work colleagues, aware of his continuing 
participation in recovery programs (Tr. 74-82), describe Applicant as professional in 
every way in carrying out his responsibilities and an outstanding employee (see ex. G).  
His plant manager and direct supervisors describe Applicant’s job performance under 
stressful conditions as exceptional and credit him with dependable and reliable 
performance on a consistent basis (ex. G). Applicant’s military and employment credits 
include numerous training certificates and team awards (see exs. D, E, and G; Tr. 51-52, 
68-69).   
      
Applicant’s father explained Applicant’s reasons for enlisting in the Marine Corps 
following his high school graduation and described Applicant’s continued devotion to the 
United States (see ex. B). A former teacher characterized Applicant as honorable, 
honest, prudent, and possessed of good morals (ex. B).  She credits him with turning his 
life completely around and attending AA meetings regularly (ex. B).  Other family 
members extol his Marine service, his sobriety commitments, and his active and healthy 
lifestyle (ex. B).   
 
Policies 
 
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making 
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could 
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations 
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions 
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered 
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or 
denied.  However, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the 
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a 
decision.  
 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent 
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs, 
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense 
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context 
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period 
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the 
applicant is an acceptable security risk.  
 6
 7
 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be 
considered together with the following ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual 
guidelines are pertinent herein: 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the 
exercise of questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
See AG ¶ 21. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription 
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations.  AG ¶ 24. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15. 
         
Burden of Proof 
 
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or 
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding 
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive 
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence 
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a 
 8
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that 
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all 
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a 
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot 
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture. 
 
The government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial 
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the 
facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a 
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the 
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or 
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, 
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or 
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be 
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 
531 (1988).  
         
Analysis 
 
Applicant is a highly regarded employee of a defense contractor with a history of 
recurrent abuse of alcohol and illegal drugs over 30 years. Applicant’s exhibited alcohol 
and drug abuse raise security concerns covered by Guidelines G and H of the AGs.  
Applicant’s omissions create initial concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability 
under Guideline E. 
 
Applicant’s alcohol issues 
 
Applicant’s recurrent problems with abusive and addictive drinking raise major 
concerns over his risk of recurrent alcohol abuse.  On the strength of the evidence 
presented, two disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Adjudication Guidelines for alcohol 
consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from 
work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” ¶ 22(d), “diagnosis 
by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or 
psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence,” ¶ 22(f), “relapse after diagnosis of 
alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.” 
 
 9
Historically, Applicant has experienced serious and recurrent problems with 
abusive and addictive drinking.  His difficulties include an award of Article 15 punishment 
during his active tour duty in the Marine Corps for a DUI offense, and several treatment 
episodes to address his alcohol dependence issues.   
 
Whether Applicant can safely avert recurrent drinking cannot be firmly 
established without an updated professional evaluation by a credentialed physician or 
licensed substance abuse counselor. His recent participation in a VA First-Step program 
was encouraging but abbreviated by his necessitated early discharge from the program 
due to behavior issues. To his credit, Applicant has continued to abide by the 
abstinence principles he absorbed during his stay with the VA-First Step program and 
has utilized a combination of VA and community resources to further solidify his sobriety 
and promote his recovery and progress as a valued member of his community. The 
updated assessment he provided from his clinical services coordinator with the VA and 
documented chips commemorating his 18 months of sustained sobriety strengthens his 
prospects for maintaining his alcohol-free commitments.  
 
Documented support of Applicant’s sustained sobriety over the past 18 months 
is, of course, an important consideration in determining what weight to assign to his  
rehabilitation claims.  See ISCR Case 02-03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006); ISCR Case 
01-20579, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004).   While his sobriety efforts certainly improve his 
chances for staying alcohol-free, with his recurrent history of alcohol abuse and 
diagnosed dependence, it is still too soon to make safe predictions that Applicant is at 
no foreseeable risk to relapse. DOHA’s Appeal Board has consistently stressed the 
importance of a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption in serious 
cases that involve extensive alcohol use and diagnosed dependence.  See ISCR Cae 
No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007). 
 
Here, although Applicant has been able to avoid any more alcohol-related arrests 
since his last arrest and conviction in 1985, his past excessive alcohol consumption was 
frequent, extreme, and recurrent over long periods of time. His relatively recent 
conversion to sobriety under the circumstances (almost 22 months) precludes any more 
than partial application of MC ¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or the behavior was 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
Without proof of a longer period of sustained abstinence (almost 22 months 
here), none of the other potentially available mitigating conditions under the alcohol 
guideline are available to Applicant.  Passage of time without a recurrent incident, and 
renewed commitments to sobriety, while certainly important, are not enough to warrant 
application of any of the other mitigating conditions without any demonstrated 
satisfaction of the requirements imposed by these other mitigating conditions.  
 
Faced with similar evidence of recurrent alcohol abuse over a considerable 
period of time, and the absence of any lengthy abstinence observance, DOHA’s Appeal 
Board has expressed reluctance to make safe, predictive judgments about an 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
applicant’s ability to avoid abusive incidents in the future without strong probative 
evidence of sustained recovery, aided by positive professional reinforcements, DOHA’s 
Appeal Board has expressed reluctance to make safe, predictive judgments about an 
applicant’s ability to avoid abusive incidents in the future.  See cases, supra.  Another 
year of abstinence is needed by Applicant to provide sufficient assurances he will not 
relapse. 
 
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, his strong work 
record, the applicable guidelines and a whole person assessment of his most recent 
alcohol moderation efforts, conclusions warrant that his overall efforts, while 
encouraging, do not reflect sufficient evidence of sustained commitment to a program 
that provides optimum protections against recurrent alcohol abuse.  In the past, he has 
enjoyed considerable periods of abuse avoidance, only to return to abusive drinking that 
involved alcohol-related incidents away from work. Because of this recurrent abuse 
problem, his earlier incidents and treatment history cannot be considered sufficiently 
behind him to afford reliable assurances he will not again relapse in the foreseeable 
future.   
 
Based on a whole-person assessment, Applicant fails to make a sufficiently 
convincing showing that he has a sufficient period of sustained abstinence, considering 
his lengthy history of recurrent alcohol abuse (with diagnosed dependence) to avert any 
recurrent problems with judgment lapses related to alcohol. His contributions to the 
Marine Corps and other participants in the VA’s First Step program are notable and 
worthy of praise. Applicant’s mitigation efforts, while considerable, are not enough, 
however, to overcome risks of potential relapse, given his recurrent abuse and addictive 
history. Some additional time in sustained abstinence (at least a year) is needed to 
facilitate safe predictions that he is no longer at risk to judgment impairment associated 
with alcohol abuse. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations 
covered by the alcohol guideline of the SOR.  
    
Applicant’s drug concerns 
 
Over a 27-year period (between 1980 and February 2008), Applicant used and 
purchased marijuana and cocaine intermittently in social situations and tested positive 
for marijuana use during his active duty tour with the Marine Corps (in 1986), and again 
in 2006.  His active involvement with illegal drugs includes arrests in 1994 and 2006 for 
marijuana possession.  Use and purchase of illegal drugs, (inclusive of marijuana and 
cocaine) are proscribed by both state law and federal law (see 21 U.S.C. § 802, et seq.   
 
Applicant’s admissions of his marijuana-related arrests, his use and purchases of  
marijuana and cocaine over recurrent periods, his testing positive for marijuana while 
serving in the U.S. Marine Corps, and his diagnosed cocaine dependence raise both 
judgment concerns and security concerns over risks of recurrence. On the strength of 
the evidence presented, several disqualifying conditions of the AGs for drug abuse are 
applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” DC ¶ 25(b), “testing positive for illegal drug 
use,” DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” DC ¶ 25(d), 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
“diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, 
or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;” DC ¶ 25(f), “failure to successfully a 
drug treatment program prescribed by a duly qualified medical professional,” and DC ¶ 
25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
Based on his own creditable testimony, the testimonials of Applicant’s character 
references, and his demonstrated abstinence over an appreciable period of time, 
Applicant is entitled to take some advantage of two of the mitigating conditions of MC ¶ 
26(b)(1), “disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts,” and MC ¶ 26(b)(2), 
“changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used,” to the merits of his 
situation.  In fairness to Applicant, he has exhibited candor about his past marijuana and 
cocaine use and his associations with persons who have used the substances.  
 
From a whole person perspective, Applicant has established independent 
probative evidence of his overall reliability and trustworthiness with his employer and 
community sponsors and understanding of DoD policy constraints on the use of illegal 
substances.  His positive endorsements from his colleagues who are familiar with his 
past marijuana involvement reinforce his discontinuance assurances.  Whole-person 
assessments, however, are still insufficient to enable Applicant to surmount the 
judgment questions raised by his recurrent use of illegal drugs over a prolonged period 
(some while holding a security clearance) and diagnosed addiction to cocaine.  Despite 
his credible abstinence efforts over the past 22 months and his strong character 
references from friends and colleagues who know him, it is still too soon to make safe 
predictions about his ability to avert any recurrence risks. Lingering doubts remain 
concerning his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Some additional 
time in sustained abstinence (a year or more) is needed to provide sufficient assurance 
that he will not return to illegal drug use. 1 
    
Considering the record on a whole, at this time there is insufficient credible 
seasoning of Applicant’s mitigation efforts (almost 22 months of sustained abstinence) 
to avert foreseeable risks of recurrent cocaine and marijuana use. Taking into account 
all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s drug use and purchases, his 
drug-related arrests, his positive drug tests, and his judgment lapses associated with his 
use of marijuana while holding a security clearance in the U.S. Marine Corps. Applicant 
fails to mitigate security concerns under Guideline H.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant 
with respect to the allegations covered by Guidelines H, as they pertain to his drug 
involvement. 
 
 
1Any recommendation to approve Applicant’s clearance in the future, of course,  is not binding on 
the Government. If Applicant’s company sponsors him for a clearance one year after the date of this 
clearance, approval of a clearance at that time will be based on all the facts and circumstances at that 
point in time. An administrative judge does not have authority to commit the government to approval of a 
clearance at some future date. See generally ISCR Case No. 08-07540 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2010); 
ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant 
[a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow [him or] her the opportunity to have a 
security clearance decision while [he or she] works on [his or] her financial problems.” and citing ISCR 
Case No. 03-07418 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 13, 2004)).   
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Personal conduct concerns 
 
Security concerns over Appellant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are 
raised under Guideline E as well as the result of his omissions of his two drug-related 
arrests and his understatement of his drug use.  By omitting his recurrent drug use and 
past experiments in marijuana cultivation, Applicant failed to furnish materially important 
background information about his drug use that was needed for the government to 
properly process and evaluate his security clearance application.  DC ¶ 16(a) of the 
personnel conduct guideline, “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities,” is fully applicable to the facts of Applicant’s situation. 
 
Applicant’s omissions are not excusable and cannot plausibly be attributable to 
misunderstanding and confusion over the scope of the questions presented in his e-
QIP. His full and voluntary disclosures to the OPM agent who interviewed him three 
months later enable him, however, to take advantage of one of the mitigating conditions 
of the personnel conduct guideline: MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.”   
 
Taking into account all of the evidence produced in this record, Applicant may be 
credited with mitigating trust and reliability concerns associated with his e-QIP 
omissions and understatements.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the 
Guideline E allegations that Applicant knowingly and wilfully (a) omitted his two drug-
related arrests and (b) understated the extent of his use of marijuana and cocaine.  
 
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including 
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs. 
 
Formal Findings  
 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact, 
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate 
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparas. 1.a through 1.f:                          Against Applicant  
 
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):              AGAINST APPLICANT  
    
 Subparas. 2.a through 2.m:       Against  Applicant 
 
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):             FOR APPLICANT     
  
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
 Subparas. 3.a and 3.b:         For  Applicant 
 
 Conclusions  
    
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security 
clearance.   Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                   
Roger C. Wesley 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
