1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-01685
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Richard L. Moorhouse, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant signed a security clearance application on October 20, 2008. On
August 21, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
In her October 7, 2009, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations
raised under both guidelines and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2009. Department Counsel and
Applicant agreed to a January 19, 2010, hearing date. A Notice of Hearing was issued
by DOHA on December 16, 2009, setting the hearing for that date.
 Ex. 5, Administrative Notice, at 1.1
 Id. at 4.2
 Id., citing to U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 6 - Terrorist Organizations,3
dated Apr. 30, 2009, at 1-2 and 13-14.In addition, several other similarly designated terrorist groups operate
in Lebanon, such as Al-Aqsa Martyr’s Brigade, Asbat Al-Ansar, Hamas, Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, and the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party. See Id. at 6.
 Id. at 14.4
 Id.5
 Ex. 5, attachment, U.S. Department of State, Recent Developments in Lebanon, dated Mar. 24, 2009, at 2.6
 Ex. 5, attachment, U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices  - 2008: Lebanon7
(Country Reports), Feb. 25, 2009, at 1.
2
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted four
exhibits (Ex.) which were accepted into the record as Exs. 1-4 without objection. A set
of documents accompanied the government’s request for administrative notice
regarding the Republic of Lebanon. They were accepted without objection as Ex. 5.
Applicant was represented by counsel and gave testimony. She submitted four
documents, which were accepted into the record as Exs. A-D without objection.
Applicant was given until February 4, 2010, to submit any additional documents. The
transcript (Tr.) was received on January 27, 2010. On January 29, 2010, three
additional documents were received from Applicant and accepted into the record as
Exs. E-G without objection. The record was closed on February 5, 2010. Based upon a
review of the case file, exhibits, and testimony, security clearance is denied.
Administrative Notice
The Government requested administrative notice of certain facts and materials
regarding the Republic of Lebanon. Lebanon became independent in 1943. Since that
time, its history “has been marked by periods of political turmoil interspersed with
prosperity.”  Although it is a parliamentary democracy, the effective exercise of political1
rights was precluded during a civil war that raged from 1975 until 1991. Post-war
reconstruction has been marked by political instability, economic uncertainty,
assassination plots involving Lebanese officials, and clashes between Israeli military
forces and Hizballah, a Shia Islamist political organization, which takes its ideological
inspiration from the Iranian Revolution.  Hizballah was designated a “Foreign Terrorist2
Organization,” and is described as  “the most technically capable terrorist group in the
world.”  The Lebanese government recognizes Hizballah as a legitimate resistance3
group.  Hizballah has elected representatives in both the Lebanese national assembly4
and cabinet. It has been involved in numerous anti-United States and anti-Israeli
terrorist attacks.  The United States (U.S.) remains “extremely concerned about the role5
Hizballah is playing in Lebanon.”  It conducts its own intelligence gathering within6
Lebanon, including surveillance cameras monitoring the Beirut airport.  7
 Ex. 5, Administrative Notice, supra, note 1, at 2.8
 Ex. 5, attachment, Country Reports, supra, note 7.9
 Ex. 5, Administrative Notice, supra, note 1, at 5.10
 Id.11
 Id at 7.12
 Id. at 6-7.13
3
Significant human rights violations exist within Lebanon. Lebanese security
forces have arbitrarily arrested and detained individuals, and detainees have
experienced torture and abuse.  Lebanese authorities “frequently interfered with the8
privacy of persons regarded as enemies of the government.”  Not only Lebanese9
citizens are at risk. Americans have been the targets of terrorist attacks in Lebanon.10
U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws that
impose special obligations on them.  The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to11
avoid travel to Lebanon due to safety and security concerns.  
Hizballah’s intelligence-gathering activities extend beyond Lebanon’s borders
and into the U.S. In August 2005 and November 2007, individuals pled guilty to
attempting to illegally export military equipment to Hizballah or agents in Lebanon
purchasing equipment for Hizballah. In December 2008, a man pled guilty to illegally
providing material support to Hizballah by providing satellite transmission services to Al
Manar, Hizballah’s Lebanon-based television station.  Other recent cases of12
intelligence-gathering exist.13
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old chief executive officer of a consulting company. She
accepted this position in October 2008 after a break from employment from October
1991 until 2008. She is married and raising two teenage children.
Born in Lebanon in 1965 as a member of the Greek Orthodox church, Applicant
was educated in Catholic schools. She eventually received a master’s degree in finance
in 1988 and became an administrator for a Lebanese export business. In the summer
of 1991, she met her present husband. Her husband was also born in Lebanon, but had
immigrated to the U.S. in 1986 and was now a dual U.S.-Lebanese citizen. By the end
of 1992, Applicant had moved to the U.S. and the couple married. She became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in June 1996 and obtained a U.S. passport in May 2006. 
Throughout her life, Applicant possessed and maintained a Lebanese passport.
It was most recently renewed in August 2008 and was set to expire in 2013. To simplify
her transit, she used her Lebanese passport during annual visits to Lebanon between
 In an interrogatory issued to Applicant by DOHA, she stated that she intended to renew her Lebanese14
passport once it expires in 2012. See SOR, dated Aug. 21, 2009. In her October 2009 Response to the SOR,
however, Applicant admitted this statement, but noted, “since this m ight be an issue for my clearance, I will
no longer be renewing my Lebanese passport.” See also Ex. 3 (Interrogatory, dated Apr. 16, 2009,
Testimonies, dated Dec. 12 - Dec. 24, 2008, at 5), “[Applicant] would be willing to relinquish her Lebanese
passport if necessary.”). She only used her Lebanese passport for trips to Lebanon. Tr. 32. Her extensive
travel elsewhere has been on her U.S. passport. Tr. 35-37.
 Tr. 46-47.15
 Ex. E (Consular Affidavit and photograph of cancelled passport).16
 Tr. 47.17
 Tr. 33-34, 44.18
 Tr. 30, 44. Only Applicant’s cousin has ties with the government of Lebanon. 19
 The value of the property was not established, but it was generally depicted as modest.20
 Tr. 30-31. “W e don’t have a summer home here, so I go spend it on the Mediterranean.” See also Tr. 41.21
 Tr. 51.22
 Tr. 55.23
 Tr. 50.24
4
1992 and 2009.  In August 2009, the SOR was issued, indicating the passport was an14
issue. In November 2009, she inquired how she could relinquish it to Lebanese officials.
She was told that the Lebanese Consulate could cancel it within 24 hours.  After the15
winter holidays, Applicant personally surrendered her Lebanese passport to Lebanese
authorities, who cancelled it on January 22, 2010, without prejudice.  16
Over the past decade, Applicant has attended one or more social functions each
year at a nearby Lebanese Consulate. She also took her children to the Consulate for
play dates with a former consular employee’s children.  Despite these interactions, she17
has no interest in politics, never voted in a foreign election, and does not discuss
politics.18
Applicant usually travels to Lebanon once or twice a year to visit her mother,
family, and friends.  She often spends her summer trips to Lebanon at a modest beach19
residence acquired by her husband in lieu of a vacation retreat within the U.S. or
elsewhere.  There, she and her children can enjoy summer by the sea and also visit20
with her mother and sisters.  Annual maintenance fees paid for the beach residence21
cover any taxes owed on the property.  She and her husband maintain a nominal bank22
account in Lebanon, which currently has a balance of “maybe $3,000 dollars.”  The23
account was recently established so the couple could access pocket money during their
visits without paying fees.24
 Although Applicant’s father was a Lebanese citizen and entrepreneur, his diplomatic role was on behalf of25
a small nation. It had no apparent ties to the Lebanese government or a Lebanese political body. His
diplomatic position helped hone Applicant’s disinterest in politics.
 Tr. 49.26
 Id.27
 Applicant was unsure whether her cousin was elected or appointed to his position. Tr. 29.28
 Ex. C (News article I) and Ex. D (News article II). See also Tr. 27-28; Ex. F (W ikipedia article).  For privacy29
concerns, these recent articles from notable news services are not identified, but are contained in the official
case file.
 Tr. 28. Applicant generally sees her relatives during her summer trips to Lebanon.30
 Tr. 48.31
 Id.32
 Ex. A (2009 Tax Forms). Applicant’s husband’s salary reflects deferred compensation.33
5
 Applicant’s mother and a younger sister are citizens and residents of Lebanon.
Her mother, a housewife, is a widow. She is financially affluent, having inherited money
and real estate investments from her late husband, a successful businessman and
diplomat who passed away several years ago.  Applicant speaks with her mother on25
the telephone about every two to four weeks.  Her sister is young, single, and lives with26
their mother. Applicant speaks with her sister if she is home when Applicant calls her
mother. Applicant’s elder sister is a Lebanese citizen residing in Jordan, where she
teaches in a French school. Her husband, a citizen of Jordan, also teaches in a private
school. Applicant speaks with her elder sister by telephone about every three months.27
Applicant’s brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has been in the U.S. for about 12
years and works in the finance sector. He is married and is expecting his first child. 
Applicant has a cousin who is an official serving the Lebanese government.  He28
is pro-American and working for positive changes within Lebanon.  Because of his29
busy schedule, he and Applicant “speak like cousins . . . like calling and maybe saying
Merry Christmas, like when I call my mother. . . but I didn’t see him last summer. . . .”30
Applicant’s mother-in-law and sister-in-law are both U.S.-Lebanese citizens and
residents of Lebanon. Applicant’s husband sometimes sends money to his mother.31
Because Lebanon does not offer state pensions, none of these relatives receive
government subsidies.32
Most of Applicant’s time is spent at work, where she earns about $480,000 a
year; her husband earns approximately $460,000 per year.  Their home is located in a33
fashionable and exclusive section of a cosmopolitan U.S. city. Applicant’s two children
 Tr. 45.34
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).35
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).36
6
were born in the U.S. and attend prestigious preparatory schools near their home.  In34
their free time, the family enjoys sports, time at their club, and entertaining. Applicant
frequents school association meetings and attends a local church. She is content with
her life as a U.S. citizen. Her financial and real estate connections to Lebanon are
through her husband.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be and were considered in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted. I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on speculation
or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a35
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  36
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
 Id.37
 Id.38
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.39
 AG ¶ 9.40
 AG ¶ 10(a). 41
7
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access37
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily38
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the39
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Contacts) to be the most pertinent to the case.
Conditions pertaining to these adjudicative guidelines that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such
concerns, are discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline C – Foreign Preference. 
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying40
include exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  41
The SOR contains five allegations under this guideline. The first allegation
concerns Applicant’s exercise of dual citizenship with Lebanon and the U.S. The
 The Government argued that the relinquishment and cancellation of Applicant’s passport mitigated the42
possession of Applicant’s passport, “but not the past use and renewables.”  Under the AG, possession of a
current foreign passport is a condition that “could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying,” to the
extent that it is an “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.” AG ¶9–¶10. Here, Applicant retained her
Lebanese passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and renewed it in 2008. W hen discovering it could pose a
security concern between late August and early October 2009, she consulted the Lebanese Consulate in
November 2009, and had it cancelled in January 2010. AG ¶11(e) a showing that the passport “has been
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated” can mitigate security
concerns. I find that Applicant’s actions meet this condition and adequately mitigate security concerns.  
8
remaining allegations concern her maintenance of a Lebanese passport. She admitted
all allegations, sufficiently raising Foreign Preference Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶
10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming
a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes, but is
not limited to (1) possession of a current foreign passport. . . ). With a foreign
preference disqualifying condition raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate
security concerns.
Before becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1996, Applicant emigrated from
Lebanon, the country of her birth. She maintained, but did not actively pursue or
reaffirm, her Lebanese citizenship. It is solely and immutably based on both her birth in
that country and her parentage. Consequently, Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition
AG ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign
country) applies. 
When Applicant received the SOR sometime between late August 2009 and
early October 2009, she learned that her Lebanese passport could pose security
concerns. After consultation with the Lebanese Consulate in November 2009, she
submitted her Lebanese passport to the Consulate for cancellation. It was cancelled in
January 2010. Therefore, AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to
the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated) also applies.
Not mentioned in the SOR are Applicant’s access to a beach house in Lebanon,
purchased by her husband, and a joint account in Lebanon which currently has a
balance of about $3,000. While these facts merit due consideration, they represent
nominal interests in comparison to her highly lucrative employment, home, and
cosmopolitan lifestyle in the U.S. Consequently, the allegations raised in the SOR
remain as the primary concerns in this case. The basis for Applicant’s dual citizenship
was credibly explained and her Lebanese passport was properly relinquished and
cancelled.  She is fully “Americanized,” enjoys a highly desirable lifestyle here in the42
U.S., and evidences every intention of remaining a U.S. citizen. In weighing all these
factors, I find that there is no evidence that Applicant has a preference for Lebanon
superior to her preference for her citizenship and life in the U.S. Foreign Preference
security concerns are mitigated. 
9
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. The adjudicator can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S.
citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are
discussed in the conclusions below.
The country at issue is Lebanon. Post-civil war reconstruction has been marked
by internal upheaval and the growing influence of Hizballah, an entity described by the
U.S. State Department as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization” and described as “the most
technically capable terrorist group in the world.” The Lebanese government recognized
Hizballah as a legitimate resistance group. Hizballah is represented within the country’s
government. It is known to have been involved in anti-U.S. terrorist attacks. The U.S.
remains “extremely concerned about the role of Hizballah is playing in Lebanon.”
Moreover, Hizballah conducts its own intelligence gathering within Lebanon and has
been tied to intelligence-gathering efforts within the U.S. 
Significant human rights violations exist within Lebanon. Lebanese security
forces arbitrarily arrest and detain individuals, detainees have experienced torture and
abuse; Lebanese authorities frequently interfere with the privacy of its citizens.
Americans have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks in Lebanon. Dual U.S.-
Lebanese citizens may be subject to laws that impose special obligations on them as
Lebanese citizens. The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to avoid all travel to
Lebanon due to safety and security concerns. Because the country at issue is Lebanon,
the facts and allegations in this case demand heightened scrutiny. At issue are six
admitted allegations related to Lebanese relatives, most of whom reside in Lebanon,
and activities Applicant and her children attended at a Lebanese Consulate. 
Applicant’s mother and younger sister are citizens and residents of Lebanon.
They maintain regular telephonic contact and Applicant visits them once or twice a year.
Applicant’s eldest sister is a citizen of Lebanon who resides in Jordan. They maintain
less frequent telephonic contact, but can visit when Applicant is on vacation in
Lebanon. Applicant maintains contact with a cousin, who is a noted Lebanese official.
Little evidence was presented with regard to her in-laws, but it may be assumed her
husband maintains some familial ties with his sister and mother, both of whom are dual
U.S.-Lebanese citizens residing in Lebanon. Applicant also has social contact with
employees of a Lebanese Consulate in the U.S. and their children. Such facts are
sufficient to give rise to Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact
 Although not raised in the SOR, Applicant’s Lebanese beach residence and bank account could give rise43
to AG ¶ 7(e) (a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned
or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation). Given the comparative worth of those assets as compared to Applicant’s U.S.-related income
and holdings, however, they do not appear to be sufficiently “substantial” to raise this disqualifying condition.
10
with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) and
AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information).  With disqualifying conditions thus raised, the43
burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate security concerns.
Applicant has close family members who are citizens and residents of Lebanon,
including an apparently affluent mother and a government official who is known to be
pro-American. She maintains contact and visits them when she can during her
vacations there. Other relatives maintain Lebanese citizenship and either live in or visit
Lebanon. She developed social friendships with Lebanese Consulate officials, and their
children shared play dates. Such facts must be considered in context. Lebanon has had
a rocky history for over 60 years. Plots to assassinate government officials are not
uncommon. Furthermore, the current and growing influence of Hizbollah, a recognized
terrorist organization with technical expertise and a record of gathering U.S.
intelligence, is of tremendous concern to the U.S. Hizbollah has been known to target
U.S. citizens and interests. Similarly, concerns exist regarding Lebanese officials’
human rights record and violations of privacy rights regarding its own citizens. Further,
Applicant and her family regularly vacation in Lebanon despite U.S. State Department
warnings against the travel of U.S. citizens to that country. Given these facts, Foreign
Influence Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign
persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.) does not apply. 
Based on Applicant’s regular telephonic contact with and visits to Lebanon to see
her mother and sisters, the women share an understandably familial bond. She shares
a similar bond with her cousin, a Lebanese official. She also befriended consular
officials and their children. Despite her clear loyalty to the U.S. and her substantial roots
in the U.S., her familial bonds and her acquaintances with consular employees and
their children are sufficiently significant to obviate application of AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty to or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) and AG ¶ 8(c)
 As noted, Applicant, herself,  has no substantial or significant financial or property interests in Lebanon that44
cannot be resolved in favor of the U.S., especially in light of her U.S.-based holdings.
11
(contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation).  No other
mitigating conditions apply.44
Foreign influence security concerns arise when foreign contacts may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in
a way that is not in U.S. interests. Scrutiny of such potential is heightened when the
country is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information or is associated
with a risk of  terrorism. Lebanon raises such concerns. Here, Applicant has
understandable bonds with family members living in Lebanon, including an affluent
mother, a younger sister, and a cousin with a significant government position. She also
socializes with consular employees and their children. Such relationships can be
manipulated by Lebanese authorities or Hizbollah agents seeking either to harm
Americans or American interests, or gain sensitive information. Consequently, Foreign
Influence security concerns remain unmitigated.   
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) –  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a credible, affable, and mature individual who is also a highly
successful businesswoman. Since immigrating to the U.S. in 1992, she has achieved
considerable professional, social, and financial success. At the same time, she has
successfully managed her parental and domestic duties. Her family spends summers
12
together abroad and share sports interests. There is no reason to doubt her loyalty to
the U.S., nor is there any doubt that she is deeply and happily entrenched in the life she
has built in the U.S. 
The fact that she was born in Lebanon to Lebanese parents is immutable, and
dual citizenship alone is not a bar to a security clearance. When advised that
maintenance of a Lebanese passport could prove to be an obstacle in acquiring such a
clearance, she returned it to the Lebanese Consulate for cancellation. That act, as well
as other considerations, led to her mitigation of foreign preference security concerns.
Security concerns remain, however, with regard to foreign influence issues.
Despite State Department warnings to the contrary, Applicant regularly vacations in
Lebanon. There, she maintains contact with her mother, sisters, and a cousin who is a
notable Lebanese governmental official. When in the U.S., she maintains varying
degrees of telephonic contact with these individuals. She also has cultivated friendships
with consular employees and their children. While such contact is understandable given
her physical proximity to a local consulate and a shared heritage, these contacts only
deepen her ties with individuals having a significant nexus to Lebanon and,
consequently, may be vulnerable to anti-American interests based in that country. Such
ties sustain foreign influence security concerns. Clearance denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.e For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a-2.f Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
