1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-03240
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant signed a security clearance application (e-QIP) on May 31, 2007. On
September 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
In an undated response, Applicant admitted the three charges raised concerning
family members in Iran and frequent visits to that country. He also requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge. The case was ultimately assigned to me on November
16, 2009. Department Counsel and Applicant agreed to a January 26, 2010, hearing
date. A Notice of Hearing was issued by DOHA on January 13, 2010, setting the
 Tr. 8.1
 In providing this information, the Government noted that [A]pplicant has done everything in his power to2
extricate himself from [the Iranian] situation [and] he is doing things the right way,” but notes that Applicant’s
relatives in Iran are in a position to “be exploited, to be manipulated, to be pressured, to be coerced.” “That
alone. . . creates the heightened risk that the directive under guideline B, 7A, talks about, [in] the disqualifying
conditions.” Tr. 52-53.
 President of the U.S., “Continuation of the National Emergency W ith Respect to Iran,” dated Nov. 9, 2006,3
reprinted in 71 Federal Register 66227, Nov. 13, 2006.
 U.S. State Department, State Sponsors of Terrorism.4
 Id.5
 Background Note: Iran at 7.6
2
hearing for that date. At the beginning of the hearing, Applicant waived his right to a
written 15-day notice regarding the hearing date.   1
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted two
documents which were accepted into the record as exhibits (Exs.) 1-2 without objection.
He also presented documents marked I through XVI for administrative notice. Lacking
any objection, they were accepted into the record as Ex. 3 (Request for Administrative
Notice and Attachments I-XVI). Applicant gave testimony and submitted four
documents, accepted as Exs. A-D without objection. Applicant was given through
February 2, 2010, to submit any additional materials. The transcript (Tr.) was received
on February 2, 2010. No additional documents were received and the record was
closed on February 10, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, exhibits, and
testimony, security clearance is denied.
Administrative Notice
The Government requested administrative notice of certain facts related to Iran,
as represented in the materials comprising Ex. 3.  Iran is an Islamic Republic where2
ultimate authority is vested in a religious scholar, the Supreme Leader. The United
States (U.S.) has not had diplomatic or consular relations with Iran since 1979, when
the U.S. Embassy was seized by students. In 2006, the November 14, 1979,
declaration of a National Emergency with Respect to Iran was continued due to Iran’s
“extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy” of the U.S.3
Iran has challenged the U.S. in Iraq and Afghanistan in order to pursue its objective of
becoming a regional power. It has sought to make the U.S. suffer political, economic,
and human costs. It has also been designated as a State Sponsor of Terrorism since
1984.  Iran’s only significant ally in the Middle East is Syria, another state sponsor of4
terrorism.  Elsewhere, it has sought to form loose alliances with anti-U.S. governments5
in the Western hemisphere, such as the Venezuelan government.  Iran is currently6
 See, e.g., U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Pennsylvania Company Fined7
for Export Violations Involving Iran, UAE, and Syria, dated Dec. 7, 2007.
 U.S. Department of State, 2008 Human Rights Report: Iran, dated Feb. 25, 2009.8
 Id.9
 Id.10
 Iran – Country Specific Information at 1 and Travel Warning: Iran.11
 Ex. C (Transcript of Message, W all Street Journal, dated Mar. 22, 2009).12
 Ex. D (W ikipedia.com, List of Iranian Americans, dated Dec, 27, 2009).13
 Ex. D (ISCR decision).14
 Tr. 57. In noting this, Applicant stated that he feels he can provide unique insight regarding that country.15
3
seeking to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, and to
illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology.7
The Iranian government has a poor human rights record.  Its abuses include8
politically motivated abductions, torture and severe punishment, arbitrary arrest and
detention, lack of fair trials, and restrictions on civil liberties.  It has been known to both9
monitor and conduct surveillance on its citizens, including interception of telephonic and
internet communication.  The government does not recognize dual nationality and will10
treat U.S.-Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens. It has prevented a number of
Iranian-American citizens who traveled to Iran for personal reasons from leaving, and in
some instances, detained and imprisoned them.  Iranian security personnel may put11
visitors under surveillance and search hotel rooms.
Applicant also provided information regarding Iran, including President Barack
Obama’s March 22, 2009, message to the people and leaders of Iran in celebration of
Nowruz.  In that speech, the President conveyed his vision of peace between the two12
countries. Applicant also offered an impressive list of notable Iranian-Americans. It
notes famous personalities from a variety of disciplines, ranging from academe and law
to entertainment and sports.  A copy of an administrative judge’s opinion in ISCR 02-13
23755 (2004) was also included.  In closing, Applicant stated, “[t]here is no question in14
my mind that [Iran] is [sic] worst regime out there, and that is a challenge not just for the
U.S. but for the whole world.”  15
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old software engineer with 20 years of experience in his
field. He has worked for his present employer, a U.S. government contractor, for
approximately 15 years. He has earned a master’s degree in computer science and is
 Tr. 35. Applicant’s wife’s family are all naturalized U.S. citizens residing in the U.S.16
 Tr. 28. Applicant noted that the day he became a U.S. citizen was “one of the proudest days of my life.”17
 Id.18
 Tr. 29.19
 Tr. 30.20
 Tr. 37.21
 Tr. 30.22
 Id.23
4
pursuing a second master’s degree. Applicant has been married for 17 years. His wife,
a naturalized U.S. citizen originally from Iran, is also a software engineer.  He has lived16
in the same U.S. city since 1995, where he owns his own home.  
Applicant was born in Iran. In 1983, he was 20 years old and the youngest of five
children. At the time, Iranian universities were closed and the future looked bleak. He
dreamed of a better life in the U.S. With the Iran-Iraq War raging, he escaped from Iran
with only a backpack, scaling mountainous regions and paying smugglers to get away.
He sought U.S. refugee status first in Turkey, then in Rome. He arrived in the U.S. in
1985, settled, and enrolled in college, where he excelled and graduated summa cum
laude. He was granted U.S. citizenship in 1990. The accomplishment of becoming an
American “had a profound effect” on him, particularly after his struggle to escape the
grim situation in Iran.  He has endeavored to “give back what I got from this country.”17 18
Meanwhile, Applicant has worked in his field of expertise, always earning “great
appraisals.”   His successful efforts were reflected in his swift rise to a supervisory19
position. He feels that applying his knowledge to his employer’s mission is a way to give
back to the U.S., noting “[m]ost of my life I’ve lived in this country, and I won’t do
anything to harm this country.”20
Applicant’s parents remain citizens of Iran and residents of Tehran, where they
lead a middle class lifestyle.  His father is 92 years old and can barely leave home21
because walking is very difficult for him. He retired before the ouster of the Shah in
1979 and receives a state pension. Applicant noted, “I don’t think any regime can do
anything to that old man.”  Applicant’s mother is 86 years old and suffers from22
Alzheimer’s Disease, so he does not believe any power “can harm her in any shape or
form.”  Applicant’s parents are self-sufficient and do not rely on their children for23
financial support. They receive some physical support from their daughters, who live
close by in apartments they own. Of his three sisters, all of whom are citizens and
residents of Iran, Applicant’s eldest sister is about 66 years old. She and his other two
 Tr. 31.24
 Id., Tr. 44-45. Applicant does not know if his nephew will remain in the U.S. or return to Iran after graduation,25
although the two maintain contact.
 Tr. 32.26
 Tr. 38.27
 Tr. 39. Applicant only calls them directly on New Year’s Day.28
 Tr. 40.29
 Tr. 40-41, 46.30
 See also Tr. 42. U.S. citizens cannot travel on a U.S. passport, so Applicant obtained an Iranian passport.31
 Tr. 33.32
 Tr. 34.33
5
older sisters are retired public school teachers. They each receive pensions.  His24
brother, who is also older than Applicant, is an eye surgeon working at local hospitals.
He has received some training at conferences held in the U.S., where his son is about
to begin collegiate studies.  Applicant maintains contact with his nephew. His brother25
maintains an upper middle class lifestyle and has a private medical practice. Applicant
is unsure whether the hospitals with which he is affiliated are public or private.26
Conversations with family members are limited to pleasantries regarding family
members and health. All they know of Applicant is that he works for his present
employer, a renowned institution. They do not discuss the nature of his work. Applicant
speaks with his parents a couple of times a week.  He also speaks with his siblings by27
telephone at times, but only if they are at his parent’s home when he calls.  28
None of his family members has been harassed by the present or past
governmental regimes. They do not talk of topics regarding life in Iran, noting that “we
know more about what is happening there than they do” because of television coverage
concerning Iran.  Another reason they do not discuss Iranian situations is because29
“you don’t know who may be listening on that end.”30
Applicant visited Iran in 1999, 2002, 2003, 2005, and 2006, to visit his family
after not seeing them since he left Iran in 1983. He only returned once his parents were
no longer able to travel independently or endure the 20 hour trip to the U.S. When Iran
became more lenient regarding travelers, Applicant applied for an Iranian passport and
traveled to them.  He eventually relinquished that passport in 2007.  He did not think31 32
his travel to Iran presented a security concern because he knew of other individuals
who traveled to Iran and maintained security clearances.  On his first trip back,33
 Tr. 42.34
 Id.35
 Tr. 43.36
 Tr. 49.37
 Tr. 50-51.38
6
Applicant had to pay a fine for having previously left the country illegally.  He never34
again encountered any difficulties coming or going. Because of his parents’
deteriorating physical conditions, he does not foresee returning to Iran.  He knew when35
he returned his Iranian passport that he would not and legally could not see his family
there again, regardless of the situation.  He is reconciled with this fact in light of his36
profession, travel laws and requirements, and the situation between the U.S. and Iran.
In describing his position, Applicant notes, “I am just an employee of the
company, [working in a] nine to five kind of job. . . . I’m not into dealings with other
external companies or anything else that I would sell products or information or
anything like that.”  He has never worked on an aspect of a classified project, having37
worked primarily with health issues and internal security maintenance.38
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).39
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).40
 Id.41
 Id.42
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.43
7
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a39
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  40
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access41
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily42
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the43
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline B (Foreign Contacts)
to be the most pertinent to the case. Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which
would mitigate such concerns, are discussed below.
8
Analysis
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. The adjudication can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S.
citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are
set forth and discussed in the conclusions below.
The country at issue is Iran. Since 1979, with the ouster of the Shah and the
occupation of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, the U.S. has had no diplomatic or consular
relations with Iran.  For over 30 years, it has been cited as an “extraordinary threat to
the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the” U.S. It has sought to make the
U.S. suffer political, economic, and human costs. Iran has been designated as a State
Sponsor of Terrorism, and courts anti-U.S. governments in the Western Hemisphere.
Iran seeks to acquire nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction, as well as
U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology. Its human rights abuses are
numerous, including the surveillance and arbitrary treatment of its citizens. As noted by
Applicant, the threat it represents is a challenge not just for the U.S., but for the whole
world. Its pursuit of U.S. technology and its sponsorship of terrorism demand that
considerations under this guideline be conducted with the highest scrutiny. 
The SOR contains three allegations under this guideline. First, that Applicant’s
parents are citizens and residents of Iran. Second, that his four siblings are citizens and
residents of Iran. Third, that he traveled to Iran five times between 1999 and 2006. 
At present, despite their poor health and advanced age, Applicant maintains
weekly telephonic contact with his parents. When his siblings, who live nearby and
often help their parents, are present, he also speaks with them. He also telephones his
siblings on New Year’s Day. His ties to his parents are strained due to their advanced
age and health issues. His ties to his sisters appear to be minimal, but understandably
familial. Applicant appears to have slightly more contact with his brother. His brother, a
physician, has been known to travel to the U.S. for medical conferences. Applicant also
maintains contact with his brother’s son, who is either in, or coming to, the U.S. for
graduate study. By his own admission, any telephonic conversation is guarded in case
their line is under surveillance by the Iranian government or associated powers. Such
surveillance is a known tactic practiced by the Iranian government and could lead to
adverse repercussions. In light of these considerations, Foreign Influence Disqualifying
Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
9
that contact creates a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion) and AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information)  apply.
The very nature of Iran’s current regime is one with intentions and purposes
antithetical to the U.S. and its citizens. Despite the advanced age and infirmity of his
parents, Applicant’s testimony demonstrated that he is a loving son who regularly
speaks to them by phone one or more times each week. Such contact is
understandable and should be respected, although, due to their health and age, it sadly
must be acknowledged that it will not last forever. The overwhelming majority of
Applicant’s contact with his Iranian siblings is limited to telephonic conversations shared
with one or more of them if he calls his parents when one or more of them is visiting
their parents. Regarding those telephone calls, Applicant recognizes that their contact
may be monitored, causing their conversations to be guarded. Given the natural need
for contact between child and parents, Iran’s surveillance of its citizens, its designs
against the U.S., its desire to gain U.S. technological information, and its record for
unbridled exploitation of its own citizens, Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions AG ¶
8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and
the interests of the U.S.) and AG ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation) do not apply . 
As noted by the Government, Applicant has done everything in his power to
divorce himself from his Iranian ties and build a new life in the U.S. He has lived in the
U.S. for the majority of his life. He has been a citizen for 25 years. Applicant has
married, settled into his community, and bought his own home. He is a long-term
employee of a reputable institution, where he has been professionally successful. He is
fully Americanized. Applicant’s depiction of the day he became a U.S. citizen was
credible, profoundly moving, and passionate. Applicant’s loyalty to the U.S. is
unquestioned and resolute. In relinquishing his Iranian passport, Applicant knowingly
severed his ability to ever again  enjoy the company of his parents and sisters. 
Despite Applicant’s early struggles and efforts, his loyalty, and his substantial
successes living in the U.S., two concerns remain. While both are transitory, they are
significant. First, Applicant’s regular weekly calls to his parents pose sufficient risk of
monitoring. While conversations are guarded, the relationship reflected in and
established by  such conversations could pose as great a risk of exploitation as any
accidentally unguarded content. Second, Applicant’s brother and his brother’s son are
citizens and residents of Iran who travel or will be traveling between the U.S. and Iran
for professional reasons. There is no evidence noting the extent of his nephew’s
10
international travel during his academic program or whether the nephew will ultimately
remain in the U.S. and seek U.S. citizenship or return to Iran. Consequently, his status
remains vague. What is clear is that Applicant maintains an understandably familial
relationship with both men. Their travel not only exposes the Applicant’s brother and
nephew to Iranian scrutiny and monitoring, but could equally make them or Applicant
vulnerable to exploitation or manipulation beyond their control. Consequently, despite
Applicant’s overt and strong loyalty to the U.S., a conflict exists sufficient to obviate
applicability of AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest). Given these two significant, albeit transient, issues, arising as they do
in the context of Iranian contacts, foreign influence security concerns remain
unmitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant’s testimony was highly credible and forthright. He is an intelligent,
personable, and happily settled 46-year-old professional. At age 20, he bravely
escaped Iran during a time of turmoil in order to seek refuge in the U.S. Since his
arrival, he has become a proud and loyal U.S. citizen, achieved academic and
professional success, married, bought a home, and settled in a community in which he
has lived for 15 years. He refrained from returning to Iran for over two decades, until his
parents became too infirm to travel. He then traveled to them, until he became aware
that his Iranian passport, a document essential to his passage to Iran, was
11
professionally problematic. Upon learning this fact, he readily returned his passport,
fully knowing it severed all future visits with his parents and, perhaps, his sisters. In so
doing, Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding his trips to Iran, as set forth in
SOR allegation ¶ 1.c.
Since that time, Applicant has maintained contact with his family only through
telephone calls. Knowing their conversations could readily be monitored, their
conversations have been discrete. Still, they establish a familial nexus that could lead to
scrutiny and exploitation. Moreover, Applicant’s brother is a medical professional who
has been known to travel to the U.S. Such travel also raises scrutiny and potential
exploitation. Finally, Applicant’s nephew is in the U.S. or preparing to enter the U.S. in
order to pursue a graduate degree program of some duration. The nephew’s contact
with Applicant and the nephew’s travel between the U.S. and Iran could well lead to
surveillance resulting in the exploitation, manipulation, or harm of any or all family
members. While with other countries, such potential may seem remote, Iran is not only
a state sponsor of terrorism, it is known for its aggressive tactics against the U.S., U.S.
citizens, and U.S. interests, disregard for privacy and human rights, and pursuit of U.S.
technological information. Applicant’s current telephonic contact with his family in Iran,
and his contact with his more transient brother and nephew, sustain foreign influence
security concerns expressed in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.b. With such concerns left
unmitigated, clearance is denied.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
