1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02008
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Richard L. Moorhouse, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant signed a security clearance application on September 16, 2008. On
August 21, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
In his October 7, 2009, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations
raised under the guidelines and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2009. The parties agreed to a January
19, 2010, hearing date. A notice to that effect was issued by DOHA on December 16,
2009.
 Ex. 4 (Administrative Notice) at 1.1
 Id. at 4.2
 Id., citing to U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 6 - Terrorist Organizations,3
dated Apr. 30, 2009, at 1-2 and 13-14.In addition, several other similarly designated terrorist groups operate
in Lebanon, such as Al-Aqsa Martyr’s Brigade, Asbat Al-Ansar, Hamas, Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, and the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party. See Id. at 6.
 Id. at 14.4
 Id.5
 U.S. Department of State, Recent Developments in Lebanon, dated Mar. 24, 2009, at 2.6
 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices  - 2008: Lebanon (Country Reports),7
Feb. 25, 2009, at 1. The report notes, for example, that Hizbollah uses surveillance cameras in Beirut’s airport.
2
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted three
exhibits (Ex.) which were admitted as Exs. 1-3 without objection. In addition, he
requested administrative notice of materials regarding the Republic of Lebanon. The
material was accepted without objection as Ex. 4. Applicant was represented by
counsel and testified. He submitted eight documents, which were accepted into the
record as Exs. A-H without objection. He was given until January 29, 2010, to submit
any additional documents for consideration. The transcript (Tr.) was received on
January 27, 2010. On January 29, 2010, three additional documents were received
from Applicant and admitted without objection as Exs. I-K. The record was closed on
February 1, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, exhibits, and testimony,
security clearance is denied.
Administrative Notice
The Republic of Lebanon became independent in 1943. Since that time, its
history “has been marked by periods of political turmoil interspersed with prosperity.”1
Although it is a parliamentary democracy, the effective exercise of political rights was
precluded during a civil war that raged from 1975 until 1991. Post-war reconstruction
has been marked by political instability, economic uncertainty, assassination plots
involving Lebanese officials, and clashes between Israeli military forces and Hizballah,
a Shia Islamist political organization which takes its ideological inspiration from the
Iranian Revolution.  Hizballah was designated a “Foreign Terrorist Organization” and is2
described as “the most technically capable terrorist group in the world.”  The Lebanese3
government recognizes Hizballah as a legitimate resistance group.  Hizballah has4
elected officials in the Lebanese National Assembly and a member of the group
currently serves in the nation’s Cabinet. It is known to have been involved in numerous
anti-United States and anti-Israeli terrorist attacks.  The United States (U.S.) remains5
“extremely concerned about the role Hizballah is playing in Lebanon.”  It also conducts6
intelligence gathering within Lebanon.  7
 Ex. , supra, note 1, at 2.8
 Country Reports, supra, note 7.9
 Ex.4, supra, note 1, at 5.10
 Id.11
 Id at 7.12
 Id. at 6-7.13
 Tr. 31.14
3
Human rights violations exist within Lebanon. Its security forces have been
known to arbitrarily arrest and detain individuals. Detainees have experienced torture
and abuse.  Lebanese authorities “frequently interfered with the privacy of persons8
regarded as enemies of the government.”  American visitors to Lebanon have been the9
targets of terrorist attacks.  Dual U.S.-Lebanese citizens may be subject to laws that10
impose special obligations on them.  The U.S. State Department warns citizens to11
avoid travel to Lebanon due to safety and security concerns.  
Hizballah’s intelligence-gathering activities have extended beyond Lebanon’s
borders into the U.S. In August 2005, an individual pled guilty to attempting to illegally
export U.S. military equipment to Hizballah. In November 2007, an individual pled guilty
to attempting to provide similar equipment to a person in Lebanon purchasing
equipment for Hizballah. In December 2008, a man pled guilty to providing material
support to Hizballah by knowingly providing satellite transmission services to its
Lebanon-based television station.  Other cases of such intelligence-gathering exist.12 13
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old chief executive officer of a consulting firm seeking a
security clearance. Born in a Christian enclave of northern Lebanon in 1952, Applicant
attended its local schools. He completed undergraduate studies in mathematics in
1973. In February 1974, he came to the U.S. to live with a relative and pursue a
graduate degree in engineering. After completing his master’s degree, he worked for a
U.S. bank before accepting a position in a consulting firm. By 1979, he incorporated a
limited liability company which initially offered software consulting services. Throughout
the 1980s, his primary client was a large U.S. bank. Later, the firm branched out into
computer generated personnel placement services. Meanwhile, Applicant became a
U.S. citizen in 1986, thus making him a U.S.-Lebanese dual national. In 1992, he
married a woman from Lebanon who became a U.S. citizen a few years later.
Inspired by Bill Gates and Steve Jobs, Applicant started developing a unique
software system.  He poured all of his energy and assets into the project until the14
 Tr. 77.15
 Tr. 75-76. Applicant remains a director in his original company.16
 Tr. 69.17
 Tr. 70.18
 Tr. 71.19
 Tr. 99.20
 Tr. 82-83.21
4
product was fully developed. In 2001, with the project completed, he incorporated a
second and independent company to capitalize on his new product. By 2009, the new
company held multiple patents and was worth about $50 million dollars.  Its clients15
exceeded 100, including his original corporation and several well known businesses. As
chief executive officer and president of the new corporation, he turned over all of his
stock in his first corporation to his wife, a previously minor shareholder, in 2009.
Consequently, she now controls the first entity, which is presently worth about $14-$15
million dollars.  16
At various points in developing his newer enterprise, Applicant considered
outsourcing projects to foreign companies from Russia, Pakistan, and India. He was
dissatisfied with his inquiries, but recognized foreign labor would be less expensive.17
An employee of Lebanese descent referred him to a company in France owned by a
Lebanese resident.  The company presented him with a “brilliant idea,” and he hired18
the entity to handle the project for about $100,000 to $120,000 a year.19
Applicant’s late father owned stores in Lebanon and his mother gave up a
teaching career to raise their three children. She remains a citizen and resident of
Lebanon. Applicant maintains contact with her, although the exact frequency of that
contact was not specified. He and his brother supplement her income with a combined
annual contribution of about $20,000.  She last visited the U.S. in 2009. His sister is20
also a resident of Lebanon and a dual U.S. - Lebanese citizen, as are her husband and
two children. Educated in Lebanon and in Europe, she is the chief administrator of a
school affiliated with a private university. Her husband has never served in the military
and works for a private bank. Applicant’s brother is a former director of a major finance
firm, but has since turned to acting. He is a U.S. citizen and resides near Applicant.
Their aunt is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a “very
wealthy” widow.  His sister-in-law, a recent college graduate, lives with his mother-in-21
law. Applicant’s wife speaks with her mother and sister about once a week and they
visit on vacations. Applicant speaks to them on holidays and may seem them during his
wife’s vacations. None of these relations receive benefits from a foreign government. In
addition, Applicant’s brother-in-law is a dual U.S.-Lebanese citizen residing in the U.S.
Another sister-in-law is married and lives in Jordan, but Applicant is unsure of her
 Tr. 89.22
 Tr. 94-95.23
 Tr. 55. In some years, Applicant and/or his family would visit Lebanon twice a year, either for winter skiing24
or Easter, depending on their children’s school schedule.
 Tr. 56. Applicant noted that he had them immediately leave Lebanon and visit Jordan during one trip in 200625
due to a conflict between Hizbollah and Israel.
 The passport apparently expired during Applicant’s last trip to Lebanon, but he had no problem leaving the26
country. The government expressed concerns that continued possession of the expired passport could allow
Applicant to effectively travel on the expired document in the future. Tr. 117-121. 
 Ex. I (Affidavit, dated Jan. 22, 2010).27
 Tr. 100. Applicant has not voted in any Lebanese elections since becoming a U.S. citizen. Tr. 102.28
 Tr. 58.29
 Tr. 59.30
 Tr. 61. This intent may also apply to his father’s other holdings, which he views as assets held in trust for31
future generations.  “[I]t is not a tradition to sell things you inherited, if you can afford it, if you don’t have to.”
At the same time, Applicant doubts both his children will continue to keep the properties in the family. Tr. 62.
5
citizenship.  Applicant’s wife maintains contact with a cousin who is a high ranking22
federal government official in Lebanon.  23
Since emigrating from Lebanon, Applicant has possessed and renewed a
Lebanese passport. He also obtained a U.S. passport in 1986. He has traveled to
Lebanon on an annual basis since about 1979. On those trips, he often joins his wife
and children for the end of their six-weeks long summer trips to the Lebanese coast.24
Applicant used his Lebanese passport in lieu of his U.S. passport to facilitate travel. He
has not had any concerns regarding his family’s security on these trips, noting that, with
one exception, their vacation venues have been calm since the 1990s.  His Lebanese25
passport expired in August 2009.  Until he learned that it could raise security concerns,26
he planned to renew the document. Instead, he relinquished it to the Lebanese
Consulate, where it was physically stamped “cancelled” and retained by the Consulate
in January 2010.  He plans to maintain his dual citizenship, however, for purposes of27
“convenience and heritage.”28
Applicant has an extensive portfolio of holdings in Lebanon. His father left his
estate to his three children, although his mother retains lifetime control over all her late
husband’s assets.   They include the home in which Applicant’s mother lives, stores,29
and about 10 acres of olive groves which have been in the family for years.  Applicant30
intends to pass on his share of the family’s olive groves to his children.  In addition to31
these shared future assets, Applicant personally invested in post-civil war Lebanon real
 Tr. 60.32
 Tr. 61-64. Applicant admitted in SOR allegation ¶ 2.d that he owned or purchased about $2.5 million dollars33
in Lebanese properties. Therefore, his inherited property potentially would be worth about $600,000.
 Id. Applicant also opened a nominal bank account in Lebanon to access funds while on vacation without34
paying transaction or ATM fees. Tr. 87. Its balances ranges from a few hundred dollars to $2,000. Tr. 88.
 Tr. 87-88.35
 Tr. 63.36
 Tr. 103.37
 Tr. 64-65.38
 Tr. 106.39
 Ex. E (2009 Tax forms). See also Tr. 73.40
6
estate during the 1990s. He invested about $1.2 million dollars in a joint venture with his
brother to purchase undeveloped land there. On his own, Applicant bought seven acres
of additional land worth about $700,000.  The land was bought with the intent to resell32
them at a profit in the future.  In 2004, he bought the modest apartment on the beach33
where his wife and children “spend a few weeks in the summer,” enabling them to also
visit with family.  During those trips, Applicant often joins them for part of their34
vacation.  Applicant made these investments with a full understanding of Lebanon, its35
real estate, and its problems. He prefers to invest his excess funds rather than put it in
savings because “cash depreciates.”  In the U.S., Applicant and his wife own his36
businesses, valued at about $65 million. Their home is in a prestigious area and is
valued at about $3.5 million dollars. He also owns a nearby apartment worth a little over
$1 million dollars.37
Applicant and his wife live in a prestigious section of a cosmopolitan U.S. city
with a large Lebanese population. His success and contributions to his community have
been publicly lauded.  He is active in a professional association and he serves on the38
board of his homeowners association. Applicant and his family are active with their local
church and interact with employees of the nearby Lebanese Consulate, which is a
popular venue for apolitical social, cultural, and civic activities. The family frequents
their clubs and often entertain.  Applicant’s children are dual U.S.–Lebanese citizens39
residing with their parents. They attend well regarded preparatory schools, where they
participate in various organizations. The family has vibrant social lives. Their 2009 tax
forms indicate that Applicant earned approximately $460,222 a year, while his wife
earned about $478,000.  They also maintain checking accounts, a retirement account,40
 Tr. 109.41
 Tr. 96.42
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).43
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).44
7
and trust funds for the children.  Applicant considers his current city of residence to be41
his permanent home. “I can’t envision myself being anywhere other than [here].”42
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be and are considered in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted. I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on speculation
or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a43
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  44
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
 Id.45
 Id.46
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.47
 AG ¶ 9.48
 AG ¶ 10(a). 49
8
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access45
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily46
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the47
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) to be the most pertinent to the case.
Conditions pertaining to these adjudicative guidelines that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such
concerns, are discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline C – Foreign Preference. 
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying48
include exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  49
Applicant admitted he maintains dual citizenship with the U.S. and Lebanon. He
also admitted he retained and renewed his Lebanese passport after becoming a U.S.
citizen in 1986, and that he used it for travel to Lebanon on numerous occasions
between 1979 and 2009. He similarly admitted that prior to the issuance of the SOR, he
 See SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.d.50
 The balance of the property owned, as noted above, is constructively held in trust for future generations.51
9
once noted that he intended to renew his Lebanese passport when it expired in August
2009. His admission of the SOR allegations is sufficient to raise Foreign Preference
Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a
family member. This includes, but is not limited to (1) possession of a current foreign
passport. . . ).  With a foreign preference disqualifying condition raised, the burden50
shifts to Applicant to mitigate security concerns.
Before becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant was a Lebanese citizen by
virtue of his parents’ nationality and his birth in that country. He later immigrated to the
U.S. and became a U.S. citizen in 1986. When apprised that possession and use of a
foreign passport could be construed to be a demonstration of foreign preference and
pose a security concern, he surrendered his expired Lebanese passport and it was
cancelled by the appropriate authorities. Such facts meet the criteria set forth in both
Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on
parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country) and AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated).
Although the Government emphasized Applicant’s real estate holdings in
Lebanon, it made no distinction between those properties purchased for investment and
resale and either those properties currently held in trust by his mother or intended for
Applicant to symbolically hold in trust for future generations. Regardless, his holdings
with current liquidating potential amount to under $2 million dollars.  They are relatively51
insignificant compared to Applicant’s approximately $65 million dollar business
enterprises, $4.5 million dollars in prime U.S. real estate, joint marital annual income of
close to $1 million dollars, their retirement and trust funds, and his family’s extensive
social, religious, and civic relationships in the U.S. To argue that his foreign investments
indicate a preference for Lebanon over the U.S. drastically distorts the value of
Applicant’s mostly undeveloped Lebanese property. It also flies in the face of his highly
credible insistence that he cannot envision living anywhere else but in the city in which
he now dwells, or his comment that he maintains his dual citizenship only as a matter of
convenience and heritage. 
Consequently, the pivotal issues regarding foreign preference remain centered
on Applicant’s acquisition of dual citizenship and his Lebanese passport. As noted, his
Lebanese citizenship is based on his parentage and place of birth. His expired
Lebanese passport was surrendered to Lebanese authorities, who cancelled and
retained the document. In light of all the facts, there is no significant evidence that
Applicant has a preference for Lebanon superior to his preference for the U.S., or that
he is prone to provide information or make decisions harmful to the U.S. Foreign
preference security concerns are mitigated.    
 SOR allegations ¶¶  2.a-2.c, respectively. Not noted in the SOR, but of equal significance, are Applicant’s52
siblings-in-law and his wife’s cousin, a Lebanese government official.
 SOR allegations ¶¶  2.a-2.f. 53
10
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. The adjudication can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S.
citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are
discussed in the conclusions below.
The country at issue is Lebanon. Post-war reconstruction between 1992 and
2005 was marked by internal upheaval, assassination plots, and the growing influence
of Hizballah, an entity described by the U.S. State Department as a “Foreign Terrorist
Organization” and described as “the most technically capable terrorist group in the
world.” The Lebanese government recognizes Hizballah as a legitimate resistance
group. Hizballah is represented within the country’s government. It is known to have
been involved in anti-U.S. terrorist attacks. The U.S. remains “extremely concerned
about the role of Hizballah is playing in Lebanon.” Moreover, Hizballah conducts its own
intelligence gathering within Lebanon and has been tied to intelligence-gathering efforts
within the U.S. 
Furthermore, significant human rights violations exist within Lebanon. Lebanese
security has been known to arbitrarily arrest and detain individuals, detainees have
experienced torture and abuse, and Lebanese authorities frequently interfere with the
privacy of its citizens. Americans have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks in
Lebanon. U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws
imposing special obligations on them as Lebanese citizens. The U.S. State Department
warns U.S. citizens to avoid travel to Lebanon due to safety and security concerns. 
Because the country at issue is Lebanon, heightened scrutiny is warranted with
regard to the admitted allegations concerning Applicant’s relatives with citizenship
and/or residency in Lebanon (mother, sister, mother-in-law, and aunt),  his real estate52
holdings in Lebanon, social events attended at the Lebanese Consulate, and his
outsourcing of work to a Lebanese company.  Such facts are sufficient to give rise to53
Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of
 The latter individual is referenced in SOR allegation ¶ 2.f.54
11
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion), AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information), and AG ¶ 7(e) (a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation). With
disqualifying conditions thus raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate security
concerns.
Applicant has close family members who are either dual U.S.-Lebanese citizens
or citizens and residents of Lebanon, including his mother, sister, and aunt. The Appeal
Board has consistently imputed a similarly familial nexus to spousal relations with whom
the spouse is close, thus opening this pool of relatives to include Applicant’s wife’s
affluent mother, sisters, and cousin, a Lebanese government official. Moreover, he has
developed acquaintances with unspecified individuals working at or visiting the
Lebanese Consulate, and with a Lebanese national who owns a French company with
which he does business.  54
Furthermore, Lebanon’s political situation has been precarious and plots to
assassinate government officials are not uncommon. Additionally, the growing influence
of Hizbollah, a recognized terrorist organization with technical expertise and a record of
gathering U.S. intelligence, is of tremendous concern to the U.S. Hizbollah has been
known to target U.S. citizens and interests. Similarly, concerns exist regarding
Lebanese officials’ human rights record and violations of citizens’ privacy rights. As well,
despite U.S. State Department warnings to U.S. citizens to avoid travel to Lebanon due
to safety and security concerns, Applicant and his family regularly visit Lebanon. They
continue to do so despite their flight to Jordan in 2006 during a Hizbollah-Israeli conflict.
Given all these facts, Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.)
does not apply. 
Applicant’s tremendous financial, professional, and social successes cannot be
denied. He has reaped exceptional wealth and vast investments through personal
vision and hard work. He has over $70 million dollars in U.S. holdings, as well as a
highly lucrative income and an active social life. His loyalty to the U.S. and his
satisfaction with his present situation cannot be questioned. These extraordinary ties to
the U.S. overwhelm his financial investments abroad, nearly a quarter of which is
valued more for its sentiment than its potential monetary worth. Moreover, his deal with
 The security concerns represented by SOR allegations ¶  2(d) and ¶ 2(f) are mitigated.55
12
a Lebanese owned French company is but a nominal component of his newest
enterprise, representing an annual business expense of only $100,000 to $120,000
from a $50 million dollar entity. Weighing his vast U.S. financial and property interests
against his comparatively unsubstantial foreign assets and nominal foreign business
contract, Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 8(f) (the nature of the foreign
business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a
conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the
individual) applies.55
Applicant’s relatives abroad, however, with whom he maintains understandable
contact, represent a strong and potentially manipulable bond to Lebanon. This is
particularly true with regard to his mother, who he helps support and with whom he
visits both in Lebanon and in the U.S., as well as his mother-in-law and his wife’s high
profile cousin, a Lebanese federal official.  Despite his clear loyalty to the U.S., deep-
seated roots in the U.S., and considerable domestic wealth, his family ties in the
country at issue are sufficiently significant to obviate application of AG ¶ 8(b) (there is
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty to or obligation to
the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) and AG
¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation).
No other mitigating conditions apply.
Foreign influence security concerns arise when foreign contacts may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in
a way that is not in U.S. interests. Scrutiny of such potential is heightened when the
country is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information or is associated
with a risk of terrorism. Lebanese forces have been linked to both these activities in
recent years. Applicant is a U.S. citizen of significant wealth and professional notoriety.
He is also a Lebanese citizen who visits Lebanon regularly and has loved ones,
relations, and contacts residing in Lebanon, some of whom are affluent or publicly
notable. Given his wealth and knowledge, he could be targeted as a malleable resource
or victim of anti-American terrorists. Conversely, his relations in Lebanon, given its
current climate and the presence of terrorists, could be exploited while at home or in
transit between our countries. In short, his relationships can be manipulated or
exploited by Lebanese authorities, Hizbollah, or foreign agents seeking to harm
Americans or American interests, or gain sensitive information. Foreign Influence
security concerns remain unmitigated.   
13
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a highly credible, educated, and straightforward man. His meteoric
rise from immigrant student to millionaire entrepreneur presents a success story worthy
of Horatio Alger. He married an accomplished woman who has shared in his success.
Their children are well-rounded students. As a family, they are thoroughly
“Americanized.” Applicant embraces the benefits of his life in the U.S. and thrives in his
professional and social milieu. He also retains and respects his Lebanese heritage and
traditions, and is socially active in his city’s Lebanese community. He visits Lebanon
when he can. It is his understandable goal to enjoy and promote the best of both
countries. Despite this dual appreciation, it is clear that his primary loyalty is to the U.S.
and that his intention is to remain in this country.
The fact that Applicant was born in Lebanon to Lebanese parents is immutable,
and dual citizenship alone is not a bar to a security clearance. When advised that
maintenance of a Lebanese passport could jeopardize his acquisition of such a
clearance, he surrendered it to Lebanese officials for cancellation. That act, as well as
other considerations, led to his mitigation of foreign preference security concerns.
Foreign influence security concerns, however, remain. While Applicant’s financial
holdings and contacts in Lebanon might be significant to most Americans, they are
comparatively minor to Applicant, whose domestic wealth, possessions, and status are
extensive. Security concerns remain because of his ties with relatives and associates in
Lebanon. Despite State Department warnings and the 2006 incident when his family left
Lebanon in favor of Jordan, Applicant regularly visits Lebanon. There, he and his family
14
directly and personally reenforce relationships they otherwise maintain from afar.
Among those contacts are an affluent mother-in-law and a cousin by marriage who is a
notable Lebanese governmental official. He also has acquaintances with consular
contacts whose presence in the U.S. may be transient, and with a Lebanese
businessman who owns a French company. His trips to Lebanon, his family’s vacations,
his contacts’ visits to the U.S., and the maintenance of his foreign relationships all
contribute toward a significant and overt nexus to Lebanon. Consequently, Applicant,
his immediate family, or his relations may be vulnerable to adverse interests based in
Lebanon. Such ties sustain foreign influence security concerns. Clearance denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
