 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-00223 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James C. Breeden, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) by Applicant’s failure to timely file her federal and state income tax 
returns and pay the taxes due. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 8, 2007. On 
October 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 9, 2009; answered it on November 23, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on November 25, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 31, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on January 4, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on January 19, 2010, scheduling the hearing for February 19, 
2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of three 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through Z, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 1, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations of failing to timely 
file state and federal tax returns alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f, and she offered 
explanations. She denied the allegation of an unpaid tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old software engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since July 1997. She has held a security clearance since October 1997. Her most 
recent performance appraisal rates her as a “3” on a five-point scale, signifying that she 
“meets expectations.” Her supervisor commented, “I have total confidence in [Applicant] 
and her abilities.” (AX J.) 
 
 Applicant married in November 1978 and divorced in May 1982. She married her 
current spouse in April 1985. She and her current spouse have three children, ages 22, 
17, and 14. She obtained an associate’s degree in business management from a 
community college in May 2002. 
 
 Applicant’s spouse has owned and operated an electrical contracting company 
since 1986. The company is organized as a Subchapter S corporation, in which the 
company profits flow directly to him and are taxed as personal income. Applicant assists 
with the company payroll, bookkeeping, and work scheduling. (Tr. 125.) They do not 
use a computer to manage their business. Instead, they do everything “long-hand.” (Tr. 
79-81.) Applicant and her spouse file joint federal and state income tax returns. To 
determine their personal income, they need to file the company return first. (Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 In October 2003, Applicant’s mother was diagnosed with a brain tumor and lung 
cancer. She underwent brain surgery followed by chemotherapy. Applicant’s father 
suffered from severe back problems, had difficulty walking, and was unable to care for 
his wife. Applicant visited her mother twice daily and was primarily responsible for her 
care until she passed away in September 2004. (AX L; Tr. 120.)  
 
Three months after Applicant’s mother passed away, her father underwent the 
back surgery he had postponed. Unfortunately, complications during the surgery left him 
unconscious for six days, followed by paralysis from the neck down. After about a 
month of physical therapy, he regained the use of his legs, but his arms remained 
paralyzed. He is diabetic and required insulin injections four times a day. During the 
day, a certified nursing assistant cared for Applicant’s father, but she went to his house 
 
3 
 
 
every morning and evening to care for him. He was disabled for about a year. (Answer 
to SOR; Tr. 121-24; GX 2 at 5.) He continued to receive physical therapy until 2008. (Tr. 
44.) 
 
During this same period, Applicant’s spouse suffered a ruptured disc in his back 
and underwent surgery. He recovered from the back surgery, but now suffers from a 
kidney disease that will require removing both kidneys. Applicant has volunteered to 
provide a replacement kidney for him. (Answer to SOR; AX I; Tr. 72, 125.) 
 
Applicant continued to work full-time, help run the family business, and care for 
her children at the same time she was caring for her parents. The combination of all the 
medical problems suffered by Applicant’s family and her spouse overwhelmed her, and 
she failed to timely file their corporate and personal tax returns. In 2005, they began 
working with their certified public accountant (CPA) to file the overdue tax returns. Filing 
the overdue returns was delayed by the difficulty of tracking down old records of 
business expenses. (GX 2 at 3, 5.) Even though their CPA was a long-time friend, 
Applicant and her spouse became frustrated with his lack of progress on the overdue 
returns, and they hired another CPA in late 2007 (Tr. 77-78.)  
 
In October 2008, Applicant and her spouse filed their corporate and personal 
income tax returns for tax year 2004. (AX A; AX B; Tr. 46-48.) In July 2009, they filed 
their corporate and personal tax returns for tax years 2005 through 2007. (AX N through 
S.) In September 2009, they filed their returns for tax year 2008. (AX T.) They received 
a refund for tax year 2008, which was applied to the taxes they owed for previous years. 
(Tr. 140.) As of the date of the hearing, their new CPA was preparing their returns for 
2009. (Tr. 59.) 
 
Although they were late in filing the corporate and personal tax returns, they 
remained current on withholding federal and state income taxes, Social Security taxes, 
and Medicare taxes from their employees. They had about five employees for most of 
the period from 2003-2007 (Tr. 142-43.) The company now consists of Applicant’s 
spouse and their oldest son. Applicant testified that she realized in hindsight that they 
should have hired someone to assist her with the business during the time she was 
caring for her mother and father. (Tr. 163.) 
 
In October 2009, Applicant and her spouse retained a tax attorney, and he 
negotiated a settlement of their unpaid 2004 federal taxes for $37,389, which they paid 
in full on April 15, 2009, using funds from Applicant’s spouse’s retirement annuity. (AX 
C; AX D; AX M; Tr. 50, 61.) They took advantage of a tax amnesty program and settled 
the 2004 state taxes for $11,709. (AX D.)  
 
In February 2010, Applicant and her spouse submitted offers in compromise for 
the state and federal taxes due for 2005 through 2008. (AX E; AX F; AX G.) They 
borrowed money from Applicant’s mother-in-law to tender the required 20% of the 
estimated taxes due for their federal and state taxes. Applicant’s mother-in-law has 
agreed to loan them a total of about $50,000, and they have agreed to repay her at the 
 
4 
 
 
rate of $500 per month (AX H.) As of the date of the hearing, they had not received 
responses to their offers in compromise. 
 
A coworker and close friend for more than 35 years testified that Applicant is 
trustworthy and honest. (Tr. 84-87.) Several life-long friends provided letters attesting to 
her integrity, compassion, dedication, and moral values. (AX Z at 1-3, 5, 7.) Present and 
former coworkers were impressed by her dedication, trustworthiness, and meticulous 
performance of duty. (AX Z at 4, 6.) The facility security officer (FSO) at Applicant’s 
work site testified Applicant informed him of her tax problems when he became FSO 
about two years ago, and she provided him with regular updates on her tax situation. He 
considers her honest and trustworthy. (AX K; Tr. 97-98.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file her state and federal income tax returns 
for 2005, 2006, and 2007 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f), and that she owes the Internal Revenue 
Service about $37,389 for tax year 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.g).  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Three potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant: AG ¶ 19(a) is raised by an 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(g) is raised by “failure to file annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.”  
 
The evidence shows that Applicant eventually paid her federal income taxes for 
2004, but that her tax liability for tax years 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 is not yet fully 
resolved. Although she failed to timely file her returns, there is no evidence of any 
fraudulent returns. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (g) are raised, shifting the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ 
 
6 
 
 
E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s tax 
delinquencies were recent and numerous, but the circumstances that caused her to 
neglect her responsibilities were unusual and not likely to recur. Her failure to get help 
running the business and her failure to file her tax returns are a serious cause of 
concern. However, after overcoming multiple and simultaneous family crises, she and 
her spouse have embarked on a realistic and responsible solution. Her past derelictions 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. The multiple medical disasters 
that befell Applicant were beyond her control. In most cases, there is not a direct cause-
and-effect relationship between family illness and failure to file tax returns, but in this 
case the family illnesses and Applicant’s multiple family responsibilities were 
overwhelming, causing her to neglect other obligations. Once her family situation 
stabilized, she was dilatory in resolving her tax delinquencies, in part because of her 
reluctance to break her relationship with their CPA, a family friend. In October 2008, 
however, she and her spouse started taking decisive and responsible measures to 
rectify the situation. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is established, because Applicant and her spouse hired a new CPA, 
hired a tax lawyer, followed their advice, and are on the way toward resolving their tax 
problems.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant need not establish that every 
delinquent debt has been paid in full. An applicant must, however, establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant and her spouse have a 
 
7 
 
 
realistic plan to resolve their tax delinquencies and have taken significant steps to 
implement it. They have filled all their returns. They cashed in a substantial retirement 
annuity to pay delinquent taxes. They paid their 2004 taxes, submitted offers in 
compromise, arranged to borrow the funds they estimate will be necessary to resolve 
their tax problems, and paid 20% of their estimated taxes for 2005 through 2008. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature woman who has worked as a federal contractor and held a 
clearance since 1997. She is highly respected in her community and among her 
coworkers. She was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. She is deeply devoted 
to her family and has a reputation for dedication and attention to duty at work. Her 
husband’s business is a family operation, dependent on Applicant to handle the 
bookkeeping and administration. Applicant realizes in hindsight that she and her 
husband should have hired someone to help her with the bookkeeping and taxes when 
she was overwhelmed by a confluence of family emergencies. Applicant and her 
husband asked their CPA, a long-time family friend, to take care of the overdue tax 
returns in 2005. When the CPA was dilatory, they were reluctant to terminate their 
relationship with a long-time friend. They finally hired a new CPA and a tax attorney, 
and their tax problems are now under control.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
 
8 
 
 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR, as required by 
Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
