 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-03661 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial considerations 
and personal conduct (falsification). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on August 27, 2008. On June 16, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct) for Applicant. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
  
 
2 
 
 
On July 14, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 28, 2009, 
Department Counsel notified Applicant that he had requested that this matter be 
converted to a hearing. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 28, 
2009. The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on August 21, 2009, scheduling the hearing for September 22, 2009. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until September 25, 2009, and at Applicant’s request 
extended the due date to October 2, 2009, to afford him the opportunity to submit 
additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE B through H, which 
were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 30, 2009. The record closed on October 2, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His answers 
with explanations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old security site associate, who has worked for his 
defense contractor employer since August 2008. (GE 1, Tr. 15, 17.) He is a first-time 
applicant for a security clearance. (Tr. 20-22.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1979. He attended a community 
college and was awarded an associate in applied science degree in broadcast 
communications in June 1999. Applicant worked as a security officer for a Midwestern 
state from September 1984 to December 2004, and took an early retirement. (GE 1, 
Tr. 55.) He is currently taking college level courses pursuing a degree in liberal arts. 
(GE 1, Tr. 19-20.)  
 
Applicant was previously married from July 1990 to March 1996. That marriage 
ended by divorce. He remarried in March 2004, and has a 14-year-old stepson from 
his second marriage. Applicant contributes to the support of his stepson. Other than 
his stepson, Applicant has no other dependent children. (GE 1, Tr. 14-16.) Applicant’s 
wife works full-time as a teacher’s aide earning $8 per hour; however, she is only paid 
when school is in session. (Tr. 65.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his October 2008 e-QIP, as well as his October 2008, May 
2009, and July 2009 credit reports. GE 1 – 4.  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified seven separate debts – five charged off accounts 
and two collection accounts, totaling $27,102. Applicant’s financial problems stem 
from debts carried over from his 1996 divorce, assuming his second wife’s debt when 
he remarried in 2004, costs associated with a move from the midwest to a western 
state, and two periods of unemployment from August 2005 to April 2006 and January 
2007 to August 2008. Applicant relocated based on the representation that he would 
have employment with a state university system. After relocating his family, he 
discovered the funding for his position “fell through,” and he was without a job. It was 
not until he secured his present position that he found stable employment. (Tr. 26-35, 
53-55.)  
 
The financial fallout from this collective experience had lingering effects. After 
evaluating his options, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 
September 2009. With the exception of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a., which is paid, the 
remaining debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.g. are included on Applicant’s Schedule F, 
and are being repaid. Applicant is on a five-year or 60 month repayment plan, and is 
current on his payments to the trustee. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.g.)(AE A, AE D-G, Tr. 45-50.) 
 
Additionally, Applicant and his wife recently qualified to purchase a home, and 
are current on their house payments and other monthly expenses. (Tr. 60-61.) In 
conjunction with filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy, Applicant attended the required financial 
counseling, which he completed on August 14, 2009. (AE C.) Given Applicant’s 
financial resources and obligations to his family, it has taken time for him to recover. 
Applicant has paid, or is in the process of repaying all debts alleged.  
 
Applicant submitted a budget with his monthly expenses that demonstrates that 
he is living within his means, and has a net remainder of $819. (AE B.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to disclose delinquent debts that were 
over 180 days delinquent in the last seven years, and delinquent debts currently over 
90 days when completing his August 2008 e-QIP. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a.)  Applicant explained 
in his Response to SOR, and credibly testified that he was not aware that these 
accounts were in a delinquent status because he was in direct contact with his 
creditors trying to work out payment plans. He added that none of these creditors were 
contacting him by telephone calls or sending him bills giving him the mistaken belief 
that he was not in arrears. (Response to SOR, Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided written comments from his supervisor. His supervisor 
described Applicant as an employee, who has a very positive attitude towards his job. 
He added that Applicant is a “self motivator who can work with limited supervision,” 
and anticipates that he can begin building a career path for him in 2010 and assist him 
with his willingness to grow within the company. His supervisor noted that Applicant 
has shown motivation for self-improvement by taking college courses and completed 
work-related training. (AE H.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
 
5 
 
 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006) provides, “Applicant’s credit report was sufficient to establish the 
Government’s prima facie case that Applicant had  . . .  delinquent [SOR] debts that 
are of security concern.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is also documented in 
his responses to DOHA interrogatories, his SOR response, and his oral statement at 
his hearing. He failed or was unable to ensure his creditors were paid as agreed. The 
government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Further 
inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required.  
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct warrants full application of AG ¶ 20(a). His debts were 
incurred following a divorce, taking on his second wife’s debt, a cross-country move, 
and two periods of unemployment. With the exception of one debt, the remaining 
debts are included in a Chapter 13 repayment plan. Applicant is involved in a stable 
relationship and has made substantial progress in resolving his debts. Apart from 
these “old debts,” he remains current on all of his bills and lives within his means. He 
is committed to repaying his creditors, and future indebtedness is unlikely to recur. His 
old debts do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
Applicant receives credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his financial problems 
resulted primarily from two significant periods of unemployment. Applicant had the 
misfortune of making a cross-country move to accept a job that did not materialize. He 
struggled and has regained control of his finances now that he has stable employment 
that pays a livable salary.1 He receives full mitigating credit because he established 
that he acted with sufficient initiative and resolve to address his delinquent debts. 
Applicant provided sufficient documentation about his income and expenditures to 
receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant was required to attend financial counseling in 
conjunction with filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and has prepared a detailed budget. 
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether the Applicant maintained contact with his or her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
7 
 
 
.   
                                                          
Moreover, he demonstrated a firm grasp of budgeting, payment plans, and expense 
reduction. He leads a modest lifestyle, lives within his means, and manages to remain 
current on his present obligations yet still managed to make payments to former 
creditors. He has the self-discipline necessary to reduce and resolve his debts. There 
are “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” He has 
also established full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because he showed good faith2 in 
the resolution of his SOR debts
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. Applicant has not contested the validity of his 
debts. Rather, he has included his debts on his Schedule F. 
 
In sum, Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances. He is current 
on his payment plans. He took the honorable route of validating his debts and is in the 
process of repaying his creditors. While his journey to financial responsibility is not yet 
complete, I am confident he will remain current on his payments and continue his 
progress on SOR debt resolution.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false 
security clearance application: 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or 
omitted required information on his August 2008 e-QIP. Applicant’s alleged 
falsification of Questions in Section 28 of his e-QIP is not substantiated. AG ¶ 17(f) 
provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case, stating, “the 
information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” AG ¶ 
17(f) fully applies to SOR ¶ 2.a. Although he admitted preparing his e-QIP, and 
answering incorrectly, he honestly and reasonably believed he was not in arrears as a 
result of his ongoing direct contact with creditors and absence of telephone calls or 
statements.3  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
3The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
9 
 
 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
    
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His debts have been 
ongoing for a number of years. His delinquent debts raise security concerns. However, 
the mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in his favor. There is no evidence of 
any security violation. Aside from the delinquent debt (which is a civil, non-criminal 
issue), he is a law-abiding citizen. The overall amount of debt is relatively low. The 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in financial 
cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). The Applicant had the 
misfortune of falling victim to a faltering economy. His biggest problems arose when 
his anticipated job following a cross-country move did not materialize. He sustained 
two periods of unemployment, but is recovering now that he is earning a sustainable 
wage. He sought the honorable route of repaying his creditors through Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. There is no reason not to trust his promise to pay his creditors. The record 
supports the fact that he has paid numerous debts over the years. He has established 
a “meaningful track record” of debt payment sufficient to trust his promise to pay or 
 
10 
 
 
otherwise resolve his debts. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. Applicant has demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism, and trustworthiness 
through his service as an employee of a defense contractor.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative g 
uidelines. Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.g.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
