                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
1
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
            
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04381 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 29, 2009, Applicant submitted her electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On November 24, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 29, 2009. Applicant 
requested her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On January 26, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on the same day. She was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
 
 
 
 
2
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on February 
8, 2010. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on March 8, 2010, within the 30 day 
time allowed that would have expired on March 10, 2010. The Department Counsel had 
no objection to her Response. I received the case assignment on March 24, 2010. 
Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.o to 
1.s, 1.u, 1.v, 1.aa, and 1.ab, and admitted all other allegations. (Items 2-4, 8)  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old, divorced with two children, and works for a defense 
contractor. She married in 1991 and divorced in 2002, according to her e-QIP. Her 
Response stated she married at age 19 (in 1991) and divorced two years later, which 
would be 1993. Applicant does not explain this discrepancy in dates, but it casts doubt 
on the validity of her other statements. (Item 1; Response)  
 
 Applicant has had three major illnesses in the past 12 years. From 1998 to 2000 
she had cancer and treatments, in 2006 she had surgery to repair an injury, and since 
2007 she has undergone treatment for a kidney ailment. As part of her kidney 
treatment, Applicant asserts her physicians removed “every abdominal organ through 
the incision in her side and cleaned and returned” them, followed by a two-month 
recovery period. Her delinquent medical debts originated with these treatments, 
according to Applicant. During these periods of time, she was unemployed for some 
periods of time, but Applicant did not provide specific dates and periods. Her income 
during her employment ranged, according to her, from $19,000 to $30,000. (Response) 
 
 Applicant has 28 delinquent debts totaling $23,520. Applicant admits to owing 9 
delinquent debts totaling $10,487. The 28 delinquent debts consist of 15 non-medical 
debts totaling $5,007 (subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.l, 1o. to 1.q, 1.s to 1.v, 
1.aa, and 1.ab); 9 medical debts totaling $8,508 (subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, 
1.m, 1.n, and 1.r); and 4 student loans totaling $10,005 (subparagraphs 1.w to 1.z). 
Applicant has 9 delinquent debts under $100 each totaling $569. She has not repaid or 
resolved any of these debts. (Items 2, 5-8) 
 
 The Government’s Item 5 is a credit report dated March 4, 2009, showing 
Applicant has 23 delinquent debts totaling $15,311. The Government’s Item 6 is a June 
9, 2009, credit report showing Applicant has 26 delinquent debts totaling $22,206. The 
final Government exhibit, Item 7, being a credit report dated October 22, 2009, shows 
Applicant with 20 delinquent debts totaling $11,095. 24 debts appear on at least two of 
these credit reports. The credit reports show the earliest delinquencies were reported in 
October 2002, on the student loans. Applicant’s debts show a pattern of accumulating 
debt and not exerting any effort to repay it. (Items 5-8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
4
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and,   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2002 to the present, Applicant accumulated 28 delinquent debts, totaling 
$23,520, which remain unpaid or unresolved. Both of these disqualifying conditions 
pertain to Applicant’s pattern of debt accumulation. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) would apply if the loss of employment or unexpected medical 
emergency were shown by Applicant to have a substantial effect on her ability to repay 
her debts. In the past eight years, Applicant has been unemployed for an undetermined 
amount of time. Her Response does not state specifically the periods of unemployment. 
Applicant does not connect her unemployment to her illnesses and then to her 
delinquent medical debts with any precision. Further, she did not show how her three 
physical ailments since 1998 adversely affected her ability to pay her debts on time. 
Applicant did not show specifically what medical insurance she has, or had, at specific 
times since 1998 to pay her medical bills, and what part of her medical debts are her 
obligation as her co-payments.  
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
Applicant has not attempted to repay the $569 she owes on nine delinquent 
debts, under $100 each. She failed to meet her burden of proof on that issue. Applicant 
failed to prove AG ¶ 20(b) applied because she did not submit sufficient evidence of the 
conditions that she asserted were beyond her control and that she acted responsibly in 
resolving her delinquent debts during the time the debts were accumulating.  
 
I considered all the remaining mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20 as they might 
apply to Applicant. The delinquent debts listed in the SOR are recent and frequent. She 
did not present any evidence she sought or obtained financial counseling to help her 
solve her debt problem. Applicant did not present a detailed repayment plan for her 
delinquent debts in her Answer or her Response. Nor did she present any evidence that 
she had a legitimate basis to contest any debt. There is no affluence at issue. For these 
reasons I concluded none of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She has not taken any action to resolve her delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves her vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of her financial obligation. Her lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. Her inaction will continue based on her past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, she exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of her delinquent 
debts during the past eight years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.ab:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
