KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s conclusions regarding the lack of knowledge on the part of Applicant’s
family and associates about Applicant’s conduct are sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-01896.a1
DATE: 04/29/2010
DATE: April 29, 2010
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-01896
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 2, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 4, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joan Caton
Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, the Board affirms
the Judge’s adverse decision.
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact:  Applicant admitted the three
allegations of disqualifying conduct in the SOR.  Applicant admitted masturbating in various public
locations and stated that he had not engaged in such conduct since 2004.  Applicant also admitted
involvement in two affairs while he was married to his first wife–a ten-year affair with a man and
an affair late in his first marriage to the woman he eventually married.  Applicant attributed the
affairs to his first wife’s depression and the effect it had on their physical relationship.  Applicant
is now happily married and is involved in a faith community with his current wife.  Applicant also
admitted engaging in sexual relations with prostitutes.  Applicant attended a military service
academy and retired from the military as a colonel with 26 years of service.  Applicant has two
grown sons from his first marriage.  Applicant’s current spouse is aware of his ten-year affair, but
is unaware of the other behavior of security concern discussed above.  Applicant’s sons are not aware
of any of that behavior.  Applicant submitted character references and performance evaluations from
former military superiors and from civilian employers.  Those individuals are aware of little or none
of the behavior.  The Judge discussed and quoted from both parties’ exhibits, including Applicant’s
character references and performance evaluations.
Applicant does not allege factual error on the part of the Judge, but objects to her
characterization of the evidence and her adverse conclusions.  In making his objections, Applicant
provides detail which was not revealed at the hearing.  The Board is not able to consider such detail,
since it constitutes new evidence.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Based on the record as a whole, the
Board finds that the Judge’s findings and conclusions are based on substantial evidence or constitute
reasonable characterization or inferences that could be drawn from the record.  Applicant has not
demonstrated error in this regard.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010).
With regard to the fact that Applicant has not told certain people about his past behavior, he
points out that the Directive does not require him to do so.  However, paragraph 16 of the
Adjudicative Guidelines lists “[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying[.]” One of the items on the list is “personal conduct, or concealment of information
about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1)
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community
standing[.]”  See Directive ¶ E2.16(e).  The Judge’s conclusions regarding the lack of knowledge by
Applicant’s family and associates about Applicant’s behavior are sustainable.
3
Applicant underwent a psychological evaluation and submitted a copy of the resulting report
at the hearing.  Applicant maintains that the Judge focused only on one small portion of the report.
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence unless the Judge
clearly states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18303 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2008).  It is not
necessary for the Judge to mention every item of evidence that she considered, but here the Judge
actually referred to other portions of the report in her decision.  Applicant has not demonstrated error
on this point. 
Applicant also argues that the Judge should have found his conduct to be mitigated because
he no longer participates in such conduct and because the conduct is so remote in time.  The Judge
considered  Applicant’s evidence of mitigation.  However, the presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-10454 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2008).
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct.  The Judge considered the possible application
of relevant mitigating conditions and discussed why she did not apply them in Applicant’s case.  The
Judge explained why the evidence Applicant presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome
the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable
evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-02653 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2009).
Given the record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under
Guideline E is sustainable.  
                     
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision is sustainable on this record.   See also Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”) 
As an alternative to granting him a clearance outright, Applicant mentions the granting of a
clearance “with a warning that any future incidents of a similar nature will result in a revocation of
the clearance.”  The Board has no authority to grant such conditional clearances.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 08-07904 at 3 (Mar. 3, 2010).
4
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
