 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02658 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 13, 2009, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on December 8, 2009. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant responded to the FORM on January 3, 2010. She did not 
object to the admission of the items attached to the FORM, and they are admitted. 
Department Counsel did not object to the documents attached to Applicant’s response, 
and they are admitted as Exhibits (AE) A through C. The case was assigned to me on 
March 19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old truck driver for a defense contractor. She is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance. She received a diploma from a vocational college. She 
married in 1985 and divorced in 1998. She married again in 1998. She has three 
surviving children, ages 26, 22, and 19, and two stepchildren, ages 21 and 19.1  
 
 Applicant and her husband have been a truck driving team since 1996. Their 
finances were stable until she injured her back while working in 2005. She was unable 
to drive and received Workers’ Compensation. The company they worked for was going 
out of business. Her husband purchased his own truck in about March 2006. Applicant’s 
weight gain after the injury was adversely affecting her back. Her doctors recommended 
gastric bypass surgery. She borrowed $25,000 to pay for the surgery, and it was 
performed in about November 2006. Her husband’s business did fine for about seven 
months, but then the truck required an expensive repair, business slowed substantially, 
and gas prices rose. They used credit cards to keep the business afloat but were unable 
to maintain the payments. Applicant admitted that they “use[d] credit in an irresponsible 
manner.” Other debts, including their mortgage, also became delinquent. Applicant 
returned to work as a truck driver for her husband’s company in August 2007, but they 
were unable to catch up on their bills. In November 2007, they paid $11,000 to attempt 
to bring their mortgage current, but they were still $10,000 in arrears. Their house was 
sold in a short sale in June 2008. Applicant and her husband concluded bankruptcy was 
their only recourse.2   
 
 The SOR alleges 31 delinquent debts, with balances totaling approximately 
$130,000. Applicant admitted owing all the debts alleged in the SOR, except she stated 
the $13,493 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q was a medical debt and not for a repossessed 
vehicle. Applicant is correct. This debt is the balance on the loan she obtained for her 
gastric bypass surgery. The debts in the SOR range from $62 (SOR ¶ 1.h) to $23,599 
owed for a student loan (SOR ¶ 1.u), and include an additional student loan (SOR ¶ 1.r - 
$21,941), two deficiencies on car loans after the vehicles were repossessed (SOR ¶¶ 
1.s - $7,601 and 1.t - $3,669), medical debts, credit cards, and a $6,500 tax debt (SOR 
¶ 1.ee) to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  
 
 Applicant listed her delinquent debts when she submitted a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) in November 2008, including $6,500 owed to the 
                                                          
1 Item 5.  
 
2 Items 4-7; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
IRS. She wrote that she was preparing to file bankruptcy, which she anticipated being 
filed in November 2008. When she was interviewed for her background investigation in 
February 2009, she told the investigator that the bankruptcy would be filed within the 
next 60 days. When she responded to DOHA interrogatories in May 2009, she wrote 
that she found an attorney, but was unable to raise the $1,600 for attorney and filing 
fees. DOHA requested the status of the $6,500 debt to the IRS. She wrote that the 
balance on the debt was $6,500 and she and her husband “will be clearing this debt and 
intend on making payment arrangements with the IRS.” Applicant’s husband filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and his debts were discharged in May 2009. Applicant filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in October 2009. Under Schedule E – Creditors Holding 
Unsecured Priority Claims, the petition listed $17,738 in unpaid federal taxes from 2007 
and 2008, and $12,357 in unpaid state taxes from 2008. Under Schedule F – Creditors 
Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed $141,837 in debts and 
included student loans of $22,700 and $24,096. Under Schedule I – Current Income of 
Individual Debtor(s), the petition listed Applicant as unemployed.3 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as required by her bankruptcy. She did 
not discuss how she plans to address any debts not discharged in bankruptcy. Applicant 
does not have a criminal record. She stated that she is an “honest, loyal, hardworking 
woman.” She felt that the denial of her security clearance questioned her patriotism, 
trustworthiness, and honesty.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
3 Items 4-7, 11.  
 
4 Items 4-7; Applicant’s response to FORM; AE B, C.  
 
 
4 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has filed bankruptcy, but her debts have not yet been discharged. Her 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to her missing work due to her back 
problems, expensive truck repairs, high gas prices, and the trucking company’s lack of 
business. These qualify as conditions that were outside her control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant also admitted that she “use[d] credit in an irresponsible 
manner.” Applicant wrote that she owed the IRS $6,500 when she submitted her SF 86 
in November 2008. Her bankruptcy petition listed $17,738 in unpaid federal taxes from 
2007 and 2008, and $12,357 in unpaid state taxes from 2008. Applicant incurred 
additional tax liability after she stated that she planned to file bankruptcy. Student loans 
are generally not discharged in bankruptcy, and it is doubtful that Applicant’s unpaid 
taxes will be discharged. She did not submit evidence of how she will address any debts 
that are not discharged in bankruptcy. I am unable to make a determination that she 
acted completely responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as part of her bankruptcy. There are 
indications that the problem is being addressed through bankruptcy. However, the 
unpaid student loans and taxes remain a concern. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. 
Bankruptcy is a legal means of addressing one’s unduly burdensome debts, but it does 
 
6 
 
not qualify as a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her debts.5 AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
applicable. 
 
 In sum, I conclude that financial concerns are still present despite some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s clean criminal record. I believe she is a loyal, patriotic, honest American 
citizen. However, at this time, there is not enough evidence in the record for me to 
conclude that her finances are in order.  
                                                          
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.ee:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
