 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01934 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Preference security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on December 22, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 4, 2010, 
scheduling the hearing for January 28, 2010. Applicant’s request for a continuance was 
 
2 
 
granted. The continuance request, Department Counsel’s objection, and the previous 
judge’s memorandum for the record are marked collectively as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
The case was reassigned to me on January 20, 2010. DOHA issued a second notice of 
hearing on January 22, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 
22, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through J, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 2, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She held a 
clearance from the Department of Homeland Security. She is applying for Department 
of Defense industrial security clearance. She was born in Germany. She is a graduate 
of a German university. She was married in 1986 and divorced in 1987. She married a 
second time in 1992 and divorced in 2000. She married her current husband in 2001. 
She has two children, ages 22 and 18.1  
 
 Applicant’s first two husbands were German citizens. Her current husband has 
been a U.S. citizen since birth. Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2002, and 
became a U.S. citizen in September 2006. She received a U.S. passport the following 
month. Her children live in the United States and both attend U.S. universities. Her 
mother, aunt, and two siblings still live in Germany.2 
 
 Applicant is dual citizen of the United States and Germany. She possesses a 
German passport that was issued in April 2002, and will not expire until April 2012. She 
used the German passport to travel to Germany in 2009. She used her U.S. passport 
when she entered and exited another country in 2007. She is unwilling to relinquish the 
German passport, and she intends to renew it upon its expiration. Her mother and aunt 
are both 70 years old. Her siblings do not live close to her mother and aunt. Applicant 
wants to keep her German passport in order to properly identify herself in Germany in 
case she has to make a decision or sign any documents on their behalf, such as their 
admission to a hospital or a nursing home. She stated that she needs the German 
passport as long as her mother and aunt are alive. She submitted a notarized sworn 
statement that she will not use the German passport for travel purposes and will only 
travel on her U.S. passport. She will not renew her German passport after her mother 
and aunt pass away. Applicant has not voted in any German elections since she 
became a U.S. citizen. She certified that she will not vote in German elections. She is a 
registered voter and has voted in the United States.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17-21, 31, 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE D. 
 
2 Tr. at 24, 28, 31-32, 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE B. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-25, 28-29, 35-340; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE G, H. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that she is a loyal U.S. citizen. She is a generous 
donor to U.S. charities. She does not donate to German charities. She pays her U.S. 
taxes and does not have a criminal record. Except for holding a German passport, she 
has received no other benefits from Germany since becoming a U.S. citizen. She has 
about $16,800 in shares of a German company, as a retirement account. She also has 
about $75,000 in checking and savings accounts in German banks. Her U.S. assets in 
checking and savings accounts, 401(k), and annuities total about $420,000.4  
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to her patriotism and loyalty to the 
United States. She is described as a proud American citizen with strong moral values, 
integrity, and character.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 26-36, 40-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE I, J. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
  Applicant possesses a current German passport, which is a right and privilege of 
foreign citizenship. AG ¶ 10(a) is applicable to the information alleged under SOR 
¶1.a.(1).  
 
  SOR ¶ 1.a.(2) alleges that Applicant “maintained [her] German passport, in part, 
so that [she is] able to vote in future German elections.” That information has not been 
established. Applicant has not voted in a German election since becoming a U.S. 
citizen, and has no intention of voting there in the future. The information alleged under 
SOR ¶ 1.a.(2) is concluded for Applicant. 
 
5 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant actively exercised her German citizenship by using her German 
passport after she became an American citizen. She declared that she will not use the 
passport to travel. She is maintaining the passport to identify herself as a German 
citizen should the need arise to assist her mother and aunt. As such, she is unwilling to 
renounce the dual citizenship that accompanies the German passport. No mitigating 
condition is completely applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant was honest and forthright at her hearing. There is no evidence that 
Applicant is anything other than an intelligent, honest, trustworthy, and loyal U.S. 
 
6 
 
citizen. However, she was unable to mitigate the considerable security concerns raised 
by her possession of a current foreign passport.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Foreign Preference security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(1):  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(2):  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
