 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04519 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility for a security clearance or access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (hereinafter SF 86).1 On a subsequent unspecified date in 2009, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of 
interrogatories pertaining to his financial situation. He responded to the interrogatories 
on August 14, 2009.2 On November 5, 2009, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
1 Item 5 (SF 86), dated March 18, 2009. 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated August 14, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) 
(hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 10, 2009. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated November 16, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant on December 28, 2009, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 
30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the FORM on January 6, 2010, and no 
submission was made by the February 5, 2010, deadline. The case was assigned to me 
on March 22, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.e., 1.g., 1.i. through 1.l., and 1.o. through 1.q. of the SOR, and denied the 
remaining allegations, claiming they were duplicates of other allegations. 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
an analyst,3 and he is seeking to obtain a security clearance. He was previously granted 
a SECRET security clearance in August 2001.4 He received a bachelor’s degree in an 
unspecified discipline in December 1988.5 He served honorably on active duty, in an 
enlisted status, with the U.S. Army from May 1998 until May 2002.6 Upon his discharge, 
from May 2002 until June 2003, he briefly held a variety of positions in the private or 
public sector, including quality assurance scientist, science teacher, and quality control 
scientist.7 Applicant held a permanent corporate position in research and development 
from June 2003 until February 2009, when he was laid off.8 Following a two-month 
period of unemployment (February-March 2009), he was hired by his current employer.9 
3 Item 5, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
4 Id. at 11. 
 
5 Id. at 3. 
 
6 Id. at 6. 
 
7 Id. at 4-5. 
 
8 Id. at 4. 
 
9 Id. at 3-4. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant and his wife were married in 1986, and they have two children, born in 1987 
and 1989, respectively, all of whom reside together.10  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2007, when his 
employer, at that time, reduced his hours and cut overtime.11 As his hours were 
reduced, Applicant made a decision to focus on certain accounts such as residence, 
automobile, food, utilities, and medical, to the exclusion of his credit cards.12 In 
September 2007, he entered into a debt consolidation agreement with a nonprofit 
organization offering credit counseling and debt management services.13 Commencing 
in November 2007, and continuing until June 2008, he made monthly $600 payments 
towards reducing his delinquent debt.14 At some point, one of the creditors withdrew 
from the debt consolidation arrangement, and Applicant cancelled further payments, 
contending he could not continue them while making separate payments to the one 
creditor.15 He eventually sought to resume making debt consolidation payments but the 
company he had been dealing with declined to assist him “at this time.”16 
 
After his brief period of unemployment, Applicant secured another position, but 
his new salary was only $19.50 per hour compared to his previous salary of $24 per 
hour.17 Applicant considered obtaining a home equity loan, but his mortgage holder 
indicated there was a requirement that he first be in a permanent position for six 
months.18 Applicant has been in his position since March 2009, but there is no evidence 
that he ever reapplied for the home equity loan once he became eligible to do so. His 
loosely envisioned repayment plan is to eventually refinance his home and pay off his 
delinquent debts as well as his car in about two years.19 His alternate plan is to enter 
into a more affordable debt consolidation program.20 His current practice is apparently 
to look to the future but do nothing now. 
 
 
10 Id. at 7-8. 
 
11 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated May 12, 2009), at 1, attached to Response to Financial 
Interrogatories, dated August 14, 2009. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Id. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. 
 
19 Id. at 3. 
 
20 Id. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
Applicant and his wife no longer use credit cards.21 He acknowledges the 
delinquent accounts appearing in his April 2009 credit report,22 but denies routine 
contact with his creditors unless they call him or send him “an offer letter.”23 He has not 
submitted a personal financial statement to reflect a monthly income, expenditures, or 
possible net remainder available for discretionary spending.  
 
The SOR contained allegations pertaining to 17 delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $72,050. While Applicant contends some of the accounts alleged in the 
SOR duplicate others (e.g., ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.n., ¶ 1.f. and 1.k., and ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.j.), an 
examination of the account numbers and transfer statements appearing in the credit 
reports does not support his contentions. All of the accounts had been placed for 
collection with a variety of collection agents, and eight of the accounts had been 
charged off.  Applicant also contends he has paid one of the accounts (¶ 1.m., a mobile 
telephone account, in the amount of $348, which was settled).24 He also claims he is 
currently making payments on three or possibly four other accounts. However, he has 
furnished no evidence, such as cancelled checks, copies of money orders, receipts, or 
creditor acknowledgments, to corroborate his payment claims. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”25 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”26   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
 
 
21 Id. 
 
22 Item 7 (Combined Credit Report (Experian, Trans Union, and Equifax), dated April 1, 2009). 
 
23 Item 6, supra note 11, at 3. 
 
24 Item 4 (Answer to SOR, dated November 16, 2009), at 3; Item 8 (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 21, 
2009), at 3. 
 
25 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
26 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”27 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.28  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”29 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”30 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
27 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
28 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
29 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
30 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
6 
                                      
 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. As noted above, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s 
finances until about 2007, when his hours were reduced and his overtime cut. Applicant 
made a decision to focus on certain accounts to the exclusion of his credit cards. After 
two months of unemployment, he secured another position, but with a lower salary than 
before. Nevertheless, accounts became delinquent and his liabilities increased to over 
$70,000. Because of the absence of financial data to reflect a monthly income, 
expenditures, or possible net remainder available for discretionary spending, it is 
impossible to determine Applicant’s ability to address his delinquent debts. AG && 19(a) 
and 19(c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
& 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@31  
 
Applicant=s financial situation started to deteriorate in 2007, when his hours were 
reduced and his overtime, cut. He was eventually laid off and was unemployed for two 
months in February-March 2009. Nevertheless, despite securing another position, albeit 
with a lower salary, he continued to accumulate substantial delinquent debt, even while 
prioritizing payments. The evidence fails to establish AG ¶ 20(a). The most recent 
declaration of intent by Applicant was made during his interview in May 2009. His 
loosely envisioned repayment plans are (1) eventually refinance his home and pay off 
his delinquent debts as well as his car in about two years; (2) enter into a more 
affordable debt consolidation program; or (3) look to the future but do nothing now. He 
has followed the path of the third option, and denies routine contact with his creditors.  
 
Applicant’s continuing delinquent debts constitute “a continuing course of 
conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence.32 The unemployment circumstances 
have not been present since March 2009, and he has been gainfully employed. 
Nevertheless, his refusal or inability to address his financial delinquencies more 
effectively since 2007, despite being unemployed for only two months, raises concerns 
about recurrence of delinquent debts and his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(b), only partially applies because his financial situation was initially 
caused by reduced salary and a brief period of unemployment, but there is little 
evidence that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances.33  
 
While there is some unsubstantiated evidence to indicate Applicant received 
counseling in handling his finances, or guidance on how to address his financial 
delinquencies, as well as some unsubstantiated evidence that he initiated a brief effort 
in 2007-2008 to repay some creditors or otherwise resolve some of his debts, there is 
31 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
32 See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 16, 2002)). 
 
33 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)).  
 
 
8 
                                      
 
no evidence to reflect actual payments under any such arrangement.  The evidence 
fails to establish AG ¶ 20(c) or AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Considering Applicant’s extensive continuing financial delinquencies, as well as 
the absence of financial data to reflect a monthly income, expenditures, or possible net 
remainder available for discretionary spending, Applicant has not demonstrated his 
financial responsibility.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. When these 
problems first began, Applicant’s hours were reduced and his overtime cut. He was 
eventually laid off and was unemployed for two months. There is unsubstantiated 
evidence regarding financial counseling, a repayment plan and repayment efforts. There 
is evidence that one of his debts was actually settled and resolved.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While the reduced salary and brief unemployment were circumstances beyond his 
control, Applicant continued to obtain services and goods from a wide variety of 
creditors, but either had no ability or intention to pay for them. As a result, he continued 
to accumulate extensive delinquent debt. (See AG & 2(a)(1) and AG & 2(a)(2).)  
Applicant has been gainfully employed since March 2009. Nevertheless, since that time, 
he refused to make any good-faith efforts to pay a variety of delinquent debts. He made 
no efforts to arrange repayment plans. Instead, he preferred to wait and consider some 
loosely envisioned repayment options. (See AG & 2(a)(6), AG & 2(a)(7), and AG & 
2(a)(9).) While these debts may eventually be paid off, his failure to repay creditors in a 
more timely manner, or even make efforts to arrange payment plans, reflects traits 
which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance.  
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are resolved or at least 
under repayment arrangements; it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. I am mindful that while any one factor, 
considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s credit history in a sympathetic light, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.34 The absence of any reasonable 
good-faith efforts or any evidence to reflect actual payments are sufficient to raise 
continuing security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)   
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:35 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
34 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
35 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
10 
                                      
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
