 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02905   
SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 17, 2009 and December 10, 2009, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on January 14, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 22, 2010, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on February 23, 2010. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted documents, which were marked AE C and D and admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 2, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since November 2008. He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1994 to 1998, and has 
served in the Navy Reserve since 1998. He has an associate’s degree, which he 
earned in 2005. He has never been married and has no children.1  
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts, with balances totaling about $15,435. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties on poor personal choices. He wrote in 
response to DOHA interrogatories: 
 
I overspent on things that I wanted such [as] clothing, travel, restaurants, and 
movies. It was easier to charge my credit cards instead [of using] my own money. 
Being immature, irresponsible and ignorant and not being able to plan my 
finance[s] correctly caused me to get in so much debt with my creditors.2  
 
Applicant was unemployed from about August 2008 until he started his current job in 
November 2008. He collected unemployment benefits during that period. Other than 
that period of unemployment, he has been steadily employed since at least 1999.3   
 
 Applicant contracted with a debt management company in November 2005, to 
assist in resolving his debts. Applicant and the company approximated his debt at that 
time at $9,215. He agreed to pay the company $1,382 in service fees though payments 
of $140 for three months, followed by 14 monthly payments of $68. In April 2007, after 
the service fees were paid, Applicant was supposed to start making monthly deposits of 
at least $140 into his bank account, which would be used to settle his debts.4   
 
 Applicant established that he has settled one debt since he contracted with the 
debt management company. In August 2009, he reached an agreement to settle the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22-24; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 16-17, 24-27; GE 1, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 17, 27-30; GE 3; AE C, D. 
 
 
3 
 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The balance of the debt at that time was $2,208. He made 
six monthly payments of $184 to settle the debt for $1,104.5  
 
 Applicant stated the debt management company is now negotiating a settlement 
with another creditor. He has been saving $25 each week to be used to settle his debts. 
He has about $600 in an account to be used for that purpose. Applicant has about 
$51,000 in student loans that were deferred and will soon have to be addressed. He 
stated he is currently paying $125 each month for his student loans, which is applied 
toward the interest. He gives his parents about $200 to $300 a month. He stated they 
do not need the money to live on; he gives it to them because it is part of his culture to 
help his family. He was paying into a timeshare condominium owned by his family. In 
his personal financial statement, he listed his monthly payment to the timeshare as 
$520. He testified that he did not actually have to pay the full $520, as that figure 
represented the total monthly payment that was split between family members. He 
stated the timeshare is now paid off. He has not received financial counseling.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
November 25, 2008. He answered “No” to Questions 28a and 28b, which asked “In the 
last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and “Are you 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant denied intentionally 
falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he misunderstood the questions and he thought that 
his debts were not delinquent because he was working with a debt management 
company. I did not find Applicant’s explanations to be credible. He admitted that several 
creditors told him they would not work with the debt management company. No 
payments were made to any of the creditors and there were no settlement agreements 
in place when Applicant submitted the SF 86.7 After considering all the evidence, I find 
that Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86.  
 
 Applicant was questioned about his finances for his background investigation on 
January 16, 2009. He admitted to his delinquent debts and described how he got into 
financial difficulties.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, B. 
 
6 Tr. at 30-45; GE 2; AE C. 
 
7 Tr. at 16, 29-32, 48-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant still owes four of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial issues are 
current and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant admitted that his financial problems resulted from his immaturity and 
irresponsibility. He was unemployed for about four months before he accepted his 
current position in November 2008. He received unemployment benefits, and his debts 
were already delinquent. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. Since he contracted with the 
debt management company in 2005, he has settled one debt for $1,104. His efforts at 
paying his delinquent debts are not yet sufficient to qualify as a good-faith effort to pay 
 
6 
 
or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. In addition to his delinquent debts, he 
has about $51,000 in student loans that will soon have to be addressed. He has not 
established clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in November 2008, when he failed to 
divulge his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable as a disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant discussed his finances and delinquent debts when he was interviewed 
for his background investigation in January 2009. That does not constitute a prompt, 
good-faith effort to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts. While 
he receives credit for discussing the information with the investigator, it is insufficient to 
establish a mitigating condition. I find that no mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
considered Applicant’s service to this country in the U.S. Navy and Navy Reserve. 
However, his finances are not in order, and he intentionally provided false information 
on his SF 86.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
8 
 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
