 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-04608 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on March 3, 2009. 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 5.) On November 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on December 12, 2009, and answered it on 
December 21, 2009, and requested determination on the record without a hearing. 
 2
Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on February 18, 2010. 
On February 22, 2010, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent 
to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM 
on March 2, 2010. He responded in an undated document. The case was assigned to 
me on April 12, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c., 
1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a security guard employed by a defense contractor since March 
2009. He has held similar positions since 2000, but he was unemployed from March to 
September 2004, February through March 2005, and November 2008 to March 2009. 
He has never held a security clearance. 
 
Applicant married in May 1980. He listed no children on his security clearance 
application, but he listed college expenses for a daughter on his personal financial 
statement. (GX 7 at 5.)  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when he started his own security business 
on a date not reflected in the record, but sometime before 2002. As the company grew, 
he started paying employees with his own savings, and he stopped withholding state 
and federal taxes from employees. (GX 6 at 3.) A federal tax lien for $11,149 was filed 
against him in August 2002. (GX 10.) State court records reflect a state tax lien filed 
against Applicant in April 1997 for $14,345, released in December 1997, and renewed 
in November 2003. (GX 11-13.) State court records also reflect a state tax lien for 
$8,381 released in December 1997 and renewed in March 2003. (GX 14 and 15.) 
 
 There is no evidence supporting SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k, alleging two state tax liens. 
The FORM contains evidence of two civil judgments in favor of a private housing entity 
that were entered on the dates alleged in the SOR for the amounts alleged. Applicant 
disclosed these civil judgments in his security clearance application. 
 
 Applicant has hired a tax resolution firm to assist him in resolving the state and 
federal tax liens. There is no evidence that any of the liens have yet been resolved.  
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement on October 9, 2009. It reflects 
that he and his spouse have a net monthly income of about $5,400, expenses of 
$1,740, and debt payments of $2,445, leaving a net remainder of about $1,215. It does 
not reflect any payments on the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 3
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the debts alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Answer to SOR Status Evidence 
1.a Federal tax 
lien 
$11,149 Admit Unresolved GX 9 at 4 
1.b State tax lien $14,345 Admit Unresolved GX 9 at 3 
1.c State tax lien $8,381 Admit Unresolved GX 9 at 3 
1.d Cell phone $362 Deny Unresolved GX 8 at 1 
1.e Credit card $364 Admit Unresolved GX 8 at 2 
1.f State tax lien $554 Admit Unresolved GX 9 at 3 
1.g Collection $834 Admit Making payments GX 9 at 6; 
GX 7 at 8-9 
1.h Collection $70 Deny Payment not 
documented 
 
1.i Collection $388 Admit Making payments GX 7 at 6-9 
1.j State tax lien $1,066 No response Unknown None 
1.k State tax lien $1,065 No response Unknown None 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 4
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised by an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” 
AG ¶ 19(g) is raised by “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” Applicant’s financial history raises AG 
 5
¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). It does not raise AG ¶ 19(g), because there is no evidence 
Applicant failed to file the required reports or that he filed fraudulent reports. The 
evidence shows only that on an unknown date he stopped withholding state and federal 
taxes from his employees. 
 
 The record contains no evidence supporting AG ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j, alleging state tax 
liens. These two allegations are resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c) and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s debts are 
numerous and most are unresolved. The tax liens occurred under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur, because Applicant no longer has a private business, but 
his deliberate decision not to withhold state and federal taxes from his employees casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established.  
 
There is no evidence of a business downturn. Instead, Applicant’s failure to 
withhold taxes while running his business was deliberate. Applicant’s periods of 
unemployment were conditions beyond his control, but the tax liens were imposed 
before he was unemployed. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not established for the tax liens 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f, but it is applicable to the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). There is 
evidence that Applicant sought professional assistance with the tax liens, but no 
evidence that the problem is being resolved or is under control. There is no evidence 
that he has sought or received counseling regarding his other debts. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(c) is not established. 
 6
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant has negotiated payment plans 
with the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i, and is making payments pursuant to 
those plans. AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i, but 
not for the other debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
denies owing the cell phone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, asserting that the original 
creditor could not find a record of the debt, but he presented no documentation of the 
basis for disputing the debt and no evidence that he has requested its removal from his 
credit report. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has worked for various employers as a security 
guard since 2000. He has provided little information about himself and no indication of 
the quality of his job performance. He mentioned financial setbacks in his response to 
the FORM but provided no details. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial 
 7
considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
