 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-02631 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 26, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 23, 2009, which DOHA received 
on July 27, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 10, 2009. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on August 21, 2009, scheduling the hearing for September 22, 2009. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until October 2, 2009, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
AE H through T, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 30, 2009. The record closed on October 2, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.d., and 1.f. with 
explanations. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., and 1.e. with 
explanations. His answers with explanations are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old engineering aide, who has worked for his defense 
contractor employer since June 2008. He testified he is an applicant for a security 
clearance,1 which is a requirement for his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 22-24.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1990. Since graduating from high 
school, he has attended several college-level institutions throughout the years and has 
accumulated 93 credit hours. He is currently working towards a Bachelor of Science 
degree in business administration. (GE 1, Tr. 24-30.)  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps from April 1991 to April 1997, and 
was honorably discharged as a sergeant (pay grade E-5). His Military Occupational 
Specialty (MOS) in the Marine Corps was 3112 (Traffic Management Specialist). He 
then served in the U.S. Army from April 1997 to June 2001, and was honorably 
discharged as a specialist 4 (pay grade E-4). His MOS in the Army was 88N 
(Transportation Management Coordinator). (GE 1, GE 4, pgs. 125-126, Tr. 30-33.) 
 
Applicant was married from December 1991 to July 2001. That marriage ended 
by divorce. He remarried in March 2007. His second wife is employed as a child 
development specialist. (GE 1, Tr. 35-36, 42.) Applicant has three sons, from three 
different mothers. His oldest son, age 16, was born during his first marriage. Applicant 
1 Applicant’s January 2009 e-QIP reflects that he had a security clearance at the confidential level, 
presumably during his military service. The e-QIP does not list the dates when Applicant previously held 
a clearance. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
pays $430 in monthly child support directly to the state for his oldest son. He pays 
$160 in monthly child support through state garnishment for his eight-year-old son. 
Applicant pays $100 through an informal arrangement to his seven-year-old son’s 
mother. He pays a cumulative amount of $690 per month in child support. (Tr. 36-42.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his January 2009 e-QIP; his May 2009 Responses to DOHA 
Financial Interrogatories; as well as his May 2009, June 2009, and August 2009 credit 
reports. GE 1 – 6.  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified six separate debts -- one repossession, two 
charged-off accounts, and three collection accounts, totaling $23,963. 
 
Applicant has settled, paid or made a good-faith attempt to resolve the six 
debts alleged. A brief summary of each debt follows. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. is 
a credit card charged-off account in the amount of $1,997.2 Applicant has 
documentation that he attempted to settle this account in good-faith going back to July 
2008, and the creditor has failed to respond to him. (GE 4, p. 105, AE H, AE J, AE O, 
Tr. 43-49.)  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. is a vehicle repossession debt in the amount of 
$8,097. Applicant settled this debt with the creditor for a lesser amount and is making 
monthly payments by direct debit. (GE 4, AE C, Tr. 49-51.) The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c. is a credit card charged-off account in the amount of $1,983. Applicant has 
documentation that he attempted to settle this account in good-faith going back to July 
2008, and the creditor has failed to respond to him. (GE 4, p. 105, AE H, AE J, AE O, 
Tr. 51-56.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. is a credit card charged-off account in the 
amount of $2,970. Applicant has settled this debt with the creditor for a lesser amount 
and has paid off that amount. (GE 4, AE G, AE L, AE M, Tr. 56-60). The debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. is medical collection account in the amount of $421. Applicant paid that 
account in full. (GE 4, AE D, Tr. 60-61.) The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. is another 
vehicle repossession that occurred at approximately the same time as the one in SOR 
¶ 1.b., supra. Applicant has documentation that he attempted to settle this account in 
good-faith going back to July 2008, and the creditor has failed to respond to him. (GE 
4, pgs. 95-99, AE K,Tr. 61-63.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to costs associated with his divorce 
in 2001, which occurred shortly after he left the Army. He was required to maintain two 
households on a reduced income. It was during this timeframe that he fell behind with 
his creditors, and his two vehicles were repossessed, discussed supra. Furthermore, 
2 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.a., 1.c., and 1.d. are three separate accounts with the same credit card 
company. 
 
4 
 
 
while struggling to maintain two households, Applicant was unemployed for six months 
from February 2002 to July 2002. (GE 1, pg. 155, Tr. 64-67.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has paid, settled, made good-faith efforts to repay 
overdue creditors, or resolved all debts alleged. He sought financial counseling and 
when he completed his coursework was provided a Certificate of Counseling on 
September 23, 2009. He submitted a budget with his monthly expenses, which reflects 
a net remainder of $1,005. His budget further demonstrates that he maintains a 
modest lifestyle and is living within his means. (AE F, AE N, AE T, Tr. 67-74.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s wife testified on his behalf. She stated that since she met Applicant 
in 2004, his priorities have been his children and paying off his debts. She recounted 
the sacrifices he has made to pay down his debt to include riding a bicycle to work, 
and selling his DVD’s, CD’s, guitar, and motorcycle. She added that Applicant’s credit 
reflects his character, and that he is dependable, responsible, and follows through on 
his word. (Tr. 86- 90.) 
 
Applicant provided reference letters from his current supervisor and a former 
supervisor. His supervisor is a senior manager within Applicant’s company. She 
described him as an employee who displayed qualities and skills needed to perform 
the highest standards and quality of work for their company. She added that Applicant 
served the country the better part of his life and proves each day he rises to the 
challenges of providing our soldiers his absolute best in his current defense contractor 
job. Applicant’s former supervisor referred to the period of time she was his 
supervising teacher and recounted his dedication, and the effort he put in as a teacher 
assistant for special-needs children. Both individuals spoke of Applicant’s honesty and 
integrity, and recommended him for a security clearance. (AE E, AE S.) 
 
Applicant submitted copies of numerous awards, commendations, certificates 
of appreciation, certificates of achievement, academic excellence awards, and 
performance evaluations from his Marine Corps and Army service. Collectively, these 
documents reflect Applicant’s favorable military service. They further reflect 
Applicant’s sense of duty and document ten years of honorable military service. (AE 
Q(1-15), AE R(1-2), AE S(1-2). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude one relevant security concern is under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and evidence 
presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. to 1.f., he had six delinquent debts totaling 
about $23,963 that have been in various states of delinquency since 2001. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b) 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debt. Because there is more than one delinquent debt, his financial problems are not 
isolated. It was not until 2008 that these debts that were paid or resolved. Therefore, 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 
01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debt “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.”  Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives partial mitigation because of his 2001 
divorce and 2002 six-month period of unemployment. However, he did not provide 
sufficient information to establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.3  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant has sought financial counseling and 
there are definite signs that his counseling has netted positive results. He has 
produced a budget that reflects he is living within his means and regained financial 
responsibility. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d).4 Applicant has paid or settled three of his debts, and has presented 
substantial evidence documenting good-faith efforts to contact three of his creditors 
and for reasons unknown those creditors failed to respond to any of Applicant’s 
overtures. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
3“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists six 
debts totalling $23,963 that were at one time or another in various states of 
delinquency. For several years, he failed to keep his accounts current or negotiate 
lesser payments, showing financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. His lack of 
success resolving delinquent debt until recently raises sufficient security concerns to 
merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of military service and good employment weighs in his favor. There 
is no evidence of any security violation during the time Applicant may have held a 
security clearance. He is a law-abiding citizen. His debts are current and his SOR 
debts are all paid or resolved. His monthly expenses are current. The Appeal Board 
has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.’” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
9 
 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His company 
fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He made mistakes, 
and debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. 
He has paid his debts. Furthermore, he has established a “meaningful track record” of 
debt payments. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.f.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
