                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-00476 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F (financial considerations) security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 28, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 13, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 4, 2009. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on July 28, 2009. The case was assigned to me on July 30, 
1 
 
2 
 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 21, 2009, scheduling the hearing for 
September 24, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until October 9, 2009, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant submitted AE K 
through U, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on October 2, 2009. The record closed on October 9, 2009. On February 16, 2010, 
I received an e-mail from the Applicant advising that he would be contacting the creditor 
for SOR ¶ 1.i. (charged off account for $67,937) to confirm the debt was paid as well as 
provide status updates on the remaining unresolved SOR debts. (Feb. 16, 2010 e-mail 
marked as Ex. I.) As of the decision issuing date, I have not received any additional 
information from the Applicant. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old circuit design electrical engineer, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since July 2007. He seeks to renew his secret 
security clearance, which he has successfully held for approximately 12 years. 
Maintaining a clearance is not a condition of his continued employment; however, 
without a clearance, he will be limited to working on non-classified programs. (GE 1, GE 
3, Tr. 17, 21-22, 33-35.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1981. He later attended a 
university from August 1995 to August 2000, and was awarded a Bachelor of Science 
degree in Electrical Engineering in May 2000. He has never married and has no 
dependents. (GE 1, GE 3, Tr. 35-37.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his August 2000 security clearance application (SF-86), his 
August 2008 e-QIP as well as his April 2001, September 2008, March 2009, April 2009, 
and July 2009 credit reports. (GE 1 – 8.) 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 12 separate debts - one past-due account, one tax 
lien, two collection accounts, and eight charged-off accounts, totaling $215,797. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a. – 1.l.) 
 
3 
 
Until 2006, Applicant was financially solvent, had a credit score in the 700s, 
owned property, had a viable retirement account, and money in the bank. In mid-2006, 
his former fiancée introduced him to an investment group that identified investors with 
good credit, such as the Applicant to (1) cash out the equity in their homes, (2) open 
credit card accounts and withdraw the maximum cash advances allowed, and (3) cash 
out their retirement plans and turn those funds over to the investment group. The 
investment group in turn would buy homes, rent them, and the rental income they 
received from tenants would theoretically cover the monthly mortgage payments. The 
investment group represented to the investors that they would reap quick returns up to 
three times their investment in a relatively short time.  
 
Applicant owned a single family home and a condominium. He refinanced those 
two properties and turned over the equity he received to the investment group. In mid-
2006, the investment group bought two properties with those funds and listed the 
Applicant as the owner of those two properties. Applicant was to forward monthly 
mortgage bills to the investment group for reimbursement. Applicant remained legally 
responsible for all payments on these newly acquired properties. (Response to SOR, 
AE E, Tr. 60, 85-88.) 
 
The investment group also opened credit cards in Applicant’s name and withdrew 
the maximum amount of cash possible from these newly opened accounts. The 
investment group invested these funds in “something” that was supposed to double 
Applicant’s money in one year. As with the real property, Applicant was to forward credit 
card bills to the investment group for reimbursement of minimum monthly payments. As 
with mortgage payments, Applicant remained legally responsible for making the 
minimum payments on these credit cards. (Response to SOR, AE E.) Applicant 
explained that only “two or three” of the credit cards on the SOR were his. He also 
stated he expected his return “in six months to a year . . . would be, you know, two, 
three times what it was.”(Tr. 43, 85-88.)  
 
Applicant liquidated his IRA and Roth IRA, also with an understanding he would 
net a substantial and quick return. Applicant stated he handed over “close to [a] half a 
million [dollars] ($500,000)” to the investment group in total. (Response to SOR, Tr. 58-
59.)  
 
In January 2007, a law firm filed a class action suit against the investment group 
and was granted a temporary restraining order against the investment group, which 
among other things, froze all funds held by them. At his hearing, Applicant was unable 
to provide any status updates of this litigation. He testified that he has not had any 
communication from the law firm representing the plaintiffs since their initial January 
2007 letter. The investment group was unable to dispense funds to investors, funds they 
needed to cover their monthly mortgage and credit card payments. This had disastrous 
financial repercussions for the Applicant. (Response to SOR, AE E, Tr. 44, 88-91.) Until 
then, Applicant received sufficient funds from the investment group to cover monthly 
expenses related to his investment expenses. As far as profit or return on his $500,000 
investment, Applicant testified that he received nothing or “zero” from the investment 
group. (Tr. 59, 85-88.)  
4 
 
 
To deal with his pressing debt, Applicant retained the services of a law firm 
specializing in debt resolution (law firm) in January 2009. He had been referred to this 
law firm by a credit counseling service in December 2008. (Response to SOR, AE E 
(Section 2).) Applicant submitted a list of creditors to the law firm and they in turn 
negotiate settlements with creditors. Applicant remits $587 per month by direct debit to 
the law firm to fund his client trust fund. The law firm’s fee for their services as well as 
payments to creditors comes directly from a client trust fund. (Response to SOR, AE A, 
AE E(Section 2).) 
 
Applicant identified the following debts for resolution: (1) SOR ¶ 1.a. credit card 
charged off account $7,291, (2) SOR ¶ 1.b. credit card charged off account $13,738, (3) 
SOR ¶ 1.c. credit card charged off account $3,631, (4) SOR ¶ 1.d. credit card charged 
off account $6,755, (5) SOR ¶ 1.e. credit card charged off account $1,658, (6) SOR ¶ 
1.f. credit card charged off account $9,835, (7) SOR ¶ 1.g. credit card charged off 
account $4,854, and (8) SOR ¶ 1.l. credit card collection account $6,958.  
 
In January 2009, the law firm wrote to each of the eight identified creditors with 
what could be referred to as a “no contact letter.” As of the hearing date, the law firm 
had settled and paid the three creditors identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.f., and 1.g. (AE A, 
AE E, AE O, Tr. 37, 61-67.) Post-hearing, Applicant submitted documentation that the 
creditor in SOR ¶1.k. tax lien $196 had been paid. (AE S, Tr. 81.) These four debts are 
the only debts from the 12 debts alleged for which Applicant submitted sufficient 
documentation of payment or resolution. (Tr. 76-81.) 
 
Additionally, and most significant are the deficiencies or indebtedness owed on 
three properties. These debts are: (1) SOR ¶ 1.h. lender charged off account $70,749, 
(2) SOR ¶ 1.i. lender charged off account $67,937, and (3) SOR ¶ 1.j. past-due account 
$22,195 with a balance of $522,000. Applicant was issued a Form 1099-A in the 
respective amounts of $70,749.44 and $522,000 for the properties associated with 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.j. In July 2009, Applicant received notification that the lender 
holding the note for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. had transferred the loan to another lender. At 
his hearing, Applicant testified that he received a Form 1099-A from the original lender, 
but was unable to locate it. To date Applicant has not provided a Form 1099 for this 
debt. (Response to SOR, AE E, AE E, pgs 30 and 34, AE R, AE V, Tr. 67-75, 80-81.)  
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a Certificate of Counseling documenting that 
he had completed credit counseling in August 2008. (AE N, Tr. 83-84.) Applicant 
testified that he earns approximately $80,000 per year and estimated that after he pays 
all his monthly bills, he has a net remainder of $1,500 per month. He no longer is a 
home owner and rents an apartment; however, he hopes to save enough to purchase 
another home. He is in the process of rebuilding his retirement account. (Tr. 92-95, AE 
P, AE Q.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s department manager testified on his behalf. He stated that he has 
known the Applicant “about two years” and observes him on a daily basis. He described 
Applicant as “hard working, “very reliable,” “solid,” “valued employee,” and has “a 
hundred percent confidence” in Applicant. He described Applicant’s duties and added 
that if Applicant were not granted a security clearance “our national defense would be 
greatly reduced.” (Tr. 17-27.) 
 
Applicant submitted several certificates which include an award from a blood 
bank for volunteer donations in 2006, a company award for his contributions for persons 
with disabilities in 2008, and another company award for outstanding job performance in 
2008. Applicant submitted performance evaluations for the years 2004 through 2009 
that reflect sustained solid performance. (AE B – D.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
6 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude one relevant security concern is under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and evidence 
presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. to 1.l., he had 12 delinquent debts totaling 
$215,797 that have been in various states of delinquency since 2007. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
7 
 
                                                          
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b). 
Because there is more than one delinquent debt, his financial problems are not isolated. 
It was not until 2009 that Applicant retained the services of a law firm for debt resolution. 
Of eight debts referred to the law firm, only three have been satisfied. Applicant also 
paid one small debt separately. Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” 
under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant’s 
situation was of his own doing. He engaged in financial behavior that “threw caution to 
the wind” leaving himself completely vulnerable in a “get rich quick” scheme. Applicant’s 
collective behavior raises serious questions about his good judgment. See ISCR Case 
No. 08-08435 (App. Bd. July 16, 2009.) The record does not support a conclusion that 
Application’s debt arose from causes outside his control. There is no evidence that 
Applicant took any affirmative steps to resolve his debts until January 2009 leaving 
them dormant for one year.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. Although Applicant did seek financial counseling, 
there are no clear indications that his financial status is under control. There is sufficient 
information to establish partial application under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant has paid or 
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
resolved four of the twelve debts alleged. He testified that he has a $1,500 net 
remainder after all his monthly bills are paid, yet he remits only $587 per month to the 
law firm to pay down his remaining debts. This explains, in part, why only three of the 
twelve debts are paid off. He paid his $196 tax lien separately. Applicant offered no 
evidence that he is disputing any of the debts alleged. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists 12 debts 
totalling $215,797. Applicant refinanced his two properties for purpose of using the 
equity in investment properties. He cashed out his retirement plans for the purpose of 
using that cash for investment purposes. Lastly, he authorized the investment group to 
open credit cards in his name for the purpose of drawing cash advances for investment 
purposes. Applicant surrendered all of his net worth, retirement accounts, and good 
credit to the investment group. They had convinced him he would reap a return of two to 
three times his investment in a relatively short time. According to Applicant’s testimony, 
he lost approximately $500,000 and received nothing in return. His lack of judgment and 
due diligence raises serious questions about his judgment and security worthiness. 
Many creditors are still waiting to be repaid and will most likely be required to accept 
less than full payment and three creditors owed significant balances on real estate 
holdings most likely will never be paid. 
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is insufficient to 
overcome the situation Applicant has created of his own doing. The volatile real estate 
market over the past several years does not excuse Applicant’s irresponsible behavior. I 
took note of his good employment record with a defense contractor, his contributions to 
the community, and the fact that he is a law-abiding citizen. His monthly expenses are 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
9 
 
current. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). I 
do not view Applicant’s monthly payment of $587 he sets aside for debt repayment 
while retaining a net monthly remainder of $1,500 as “significant action.” Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
In fairness to the Applicant, this decision should not be construed as a 
determination that he cannot or will not attain the state of financial stability necessary to 
justify the holding of a security clearance. To the contrary, his mitigating evidence and 
whole-person analysis suggests a sound potential for positive reform and outstanding 
accomplishments in the defense industry. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity 
to reapply for a security clearance, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence 
warranting a favorable result. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e. – 1.g.: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h. – 1.j.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
