 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05000 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign preference and 
personal conduct.  Eligibility for a security clearance with access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing version of a Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP).1 On July 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of interrogatories pertaining to his potential foreign 
preference. He responded to the interrogatories on August 11, 2009.2 On November 3, 
2009, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP), dated February 25, 2009. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated August 11, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access 
to Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006) (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) 
and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 10, 2009. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated November 16, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on December 31, 2009, 
and the case was assigned to Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran on January 
11, 2010. It was reassigned to me on February 12, 2010, due to caseload 
considerations. A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 12, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing, as scheduled, on March 29, 2010. 
 
 During the hearing, seven Government exhibits and one Applicant exhibit (with 
17 tabs) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on April 6, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation in ¶ 1.a. of 
the SOR, and denied the remaining allegation. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a senior network administrator,3 and he is seeking to obtain a TOP SECRET security 
clearance. He was previously granted a SECRET security clearance in August 2007.4  
 
He received a bachelor’s degree in an unspecified discipline in December 1987,5 
and attended nearly six months of continuing education in a part-time status in 2006.6 In 
1972, when he was 17 years old, Applicant joined the U.S. Army and served honorably 
for about two months before it was determined that he had not been medically fit at the 
time of his enlistment.7 He received an honorable discharge in June 1972.8 Applicant 
3 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
4 Id. at 56. 
 
5 Id. at 18. 
 
6 Id. at 16. 
 
7 Tr. at 71. 
 
8 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 27. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
was employed by several different companies and held a variety of different positions 
over the years, including supplier quality assurance manager, factory worker, 
development engineer, engineering manager, and control and release manager.9 He 
joined his current employer as a PC systems assistant in December 2006.10  
 
Applicant has been married three times, with the first two marriages ending in 
divorce. He married his first wife in August 1977. They had two children, and eventually 
divorced in August 1990.11 He married his second wife in October 1992, and they 
divorced in August 1998.12 His relationship with his third wife is the reason for this 
security clearance review. 
 
At some unspecified time, thought to be in 2006 or early 2007, Applicant met a 
woman through a friend at church. The friend was aware that Applicant had been 
“looking for somebody who held some very high virtues, and values, and principles.”13 
The woman happened to be a Mexican national visiting from Mexico. They dated and 
eventually married in Mexico in December 2007.14  
 
Applicant’s wife possessed a U.S. visitor’s visa at the time of their wedding, and 
under U.S. law, according to Applicant, her marriage was construed as an intention to 
immigrate. She was required by U.S. immigration law to leave the U.S.15 Applicant 
informed his facility security officer (FSO) of his desire to remain with his bride and his 
intention to establish a residence in Mexico until such time as U.S. law would allow her 
to obtain the appropriate visa to remain permanently in the U.S.16 In order to comply 
with Mexican law, Applicant obtained a short-term nonimmigrant (FMT) visa when he 
obtained his marriage permit.17 Because of their proximity to the U.S.-Mexican border, 
commencing January 3, 2008, Applicant and his bride resided in a rented home in a 
Mexican border community, and Applicant commuted across the border to work each 
day.18 
 
9 Government Exhibit 2 (SF 86), dated December 7, 2006), at 15-20. 
 
10 Id. at 14. 
 
11 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 33, 36-37. 
 
12 Id. at 32, 
 
13 Tr. at 59. 
 
14 Id. at 60; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
15 Applicant’s Answer to SOR, dated November 16, 2009, at 2. 
 
16 Applicant Exhibit A-2 (E-mail from Applicant to FSO, dated December 11, 2007; E-mail from Applicant to 
FSO, dated December 12, 2007). 
 
17 Tr. at 30, 32. 
 
18 Tr. at 31, 55; Applicant’s Personal Subject Interview, dated March 17, 2009, at 1-2, attached to 
Government Exhibit 3, supra note 2. 
 
4 
                                      
 
 
                                                          
FOREIGN PREFERENCE 
 
In March 2008, when a Mexican immigration official told Applicant he was 
residing illegally in Mexico under Mexican law because he was renting a residence in 
the country with only a short-term visitor’s visa,19 Applicant decided to comply with 
Mexican law and applied for an FM2 immigrant visa.20 The FM2 visa is intended for 
persons seeking to reside in Mexico for nine months or more.21 Since he was under the 
impression that his wife’s U.S. visa could take up to two years to obtain,22 and he could 
import his personal possessions into Mexico without restriction,23 Applicant chose the 
FM2 visa over the FM3 long-term nonimmigrant visa.24 One other benefit of the FM2 
visa over the FM3 visa was that if he should eventually decide to retire to Mexico, or if 
he hoped to hold property or receive an inheritance, his period of eligibility would run 
from the beginning and be verified each year by Mexican authorities.25 
 
In April 2008, after only two months of spending time and effort in repairing and 
cleaning their Mexican residence, Applicant’s landlord gave him two days notice to 
relocate.26 As the holder, at that time, of only the FMT visa, Applicant possessed no 
negotiating rights and was in no position to argue.27 So, Applicant and his wife relocated 
to a U.S. border community.28 Within a week of his return to the U.S., Applicant 
received his FM2 visa.29 He decided to retain the FM2 visa in the event his wife could 
not remain in the U.S. with her visitor visa.30 Finally, nearly nine months after they were 
married, Applicant’s wife received her U.S. K-3 spousal nonimmigrant visa, allowing her 
to remain in the U.S. pending receipt of her immigrant visa.31
 
19 Tr. at 32. 
 
20 Id. 
 
21 Id. at 33. 
 
22 Id. 
 
23 Id. 
 
24 Id. at 33-34. 
 
25 Id. at 34-35. 
 
26 Id. at 36. 
 
27 Id. 
 
28 Id. at 37. 
 
29 Id. 
 
30 Id. at 38-39. 
 
31 Id. at 39. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
In October 2008, considering their future, Applicant declared to his FSO: “We 
plan to keep a place to live in [Mexico] as well as in [U.S.]. Eventually we would both 
like to be dual citizens.”32 
 
In light of the problems caused by Applicant’s application for the Mexican FM2 
visa and the current instability along the U.S. – Mexican border, Applicant and his wife 
underwent a substantial change of heart. Since his wife can now remain in the U.S. as a 
legal permanent resident,33 and is no longer comfortable residing in Mexico,34 in 
January 2010, Applicant sought the cancellation of his Mexican FM2 visa. It was 
cancelled on January 13, 2010.35 
 
Neither Applicant nor his wife holds a Mexican visa;36 owns any property in 
Mexico;37 is eligible for any type of Mexican social security or retirement benefits;38 or 
has any Mexican bank accounts or other financial accounts.39 While Applicant’s wife 
may someday be in line to share an inheritance of approximately $20,000 worth of 
Mexican property,40 it is highly unlikely, because the property is highly leveraged and of 
little value.41 Nevertheless, Applicant has an “idealistic” and “romantic” vision of 
eventually owning a safe retreat in Mexico.42 His wife does not share his vision.43 
 
Applicant denies any foreign preference:44 
 
I have been and remain a faithful, trustworthy, reliable, committed citizen 
and servant of the U.S. I have no preference for any other country over 
the U.S. I will always endeavor to protect and serve my country. 
 
32 Id. at 41; Applicant Exhibit A-5 (E-mail from Applicant to FSO, dated October 1, 2008). 
 
33 Tr. at 50. 
 
34 Id. at 58. 
 
35 Applicant Exhibit A-15 (National Institute of Migration Cancellation of Document, dated January 13, 2010.) 
 
36 Tr. at 50. 
 
37 Id. 
 
38 Id. at 54. 
 
39 Id. 56. 
 
40 Id. at 52, 
 
41 Id. at 52-53. 
 
42 Id. at 53-54. 
 
43 Id. at 59. 
 
44 Applicant’s Answer to SOR, supra note 15, at 2. 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
If my holding the FM2 or holding dual citizen status with Mexico by me or 
my wife is a security concern, then I am prepared to immediately follow a 
course of action to terminate the process of becoming dual citizens. If I 
thought it would compromise national security or lead anyone to think I 
preferred Mexico or would not protect U.S. interests, I would not have 
considered it as an option. It only came up when I was trying to faithfully 
follow the letter of U.S. immigration law. 
 
PERSONAL CONDUCT 
 
 On February 25, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted  
a completed e-QIP.45 The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
complete information in response to § 20B: Foreign Business, Professional Activities, 
and Foreign Government Contacts. The section contains six individual questions, the 
first three of which are irrelevant as they pertain only to foreign business activities. The 
last question pertains to foreign passports, and is not relevant. The first relevant 
question is § 20B.4: (In the last 7 years, have you or any of your immediate family 
members had any contact with a foreign government, its establishment (embassies, 
consulates, agencies, or military services), or its representatives, whether inside or 
outside the U.S.?)). Applicant answered “Yes” and listed the following foreign entities: 
civil registry, immigration, driver’s license, and voter’s registration.46 He provided the 
dates of contact as November 2007 to August 2008 (estimated).47 He added a 
description of the circumstances as “. . . in order to get married, live in Mexico, and 
lastly to correct wife’s birth date on birth certificate.”48  
 
The other relevant question is § 20B.5: (In the last 7 years, have you sponsored 
any foreign citizen to come to the U.S. as a student, for work, or for permanent 
residence?). Applicant answered “Yes” and added: “This is my wife who is not involved 
with foreign business, professional activities, or foreign government. I am sponsoring 
her for immigration. We had many interactions with Mexican government offices to 
marry in Mexico and immigrate to the USA.”49 
 
Applicant attributes his failure to specifically list his application for the Mexican 
FM2 visa to confusion rather than an intentional concealment. He stated:50 
 
I have made a diligent and continuous effort to understand and satisfy the 
eQip application, the collection of evidence by the Security Officer who 
45 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1. 
 
46 Id. at 48. 
 
47 Id. 
 
48 Id. 
 
49 Id. at 48-49. 
 
50 Applicant’s Answer to SOR, supra note 15, at 3. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
acts on behalf of [the employer] and the DSS, the DSS investigator during 
the interview, and all follow on questions. It has always been my intent 
and the purpose of any of my actions to provide all information requested 
in a manner that would be accurate, complete, and would lead to the 
desired understanding by anyone involved with the clearance application 
process. My understanding of how to approach the clearance application 
process has been to provide as much information as seemed required and 
reasonable on the eQip, review information and questions with the 
Security Officer, provide any supporting information to be placed in the 
folder kept by the Security Officer for DSS review, and have a personal 
interview based on all this information with a DSS investigator. 
 
He added:51 
 
It was my understanding after reading and studying the questions that the 
information I provided was what was being requested and more. I stated 
that I had contacts with immigration in a foreign country. I was not 100% 
sure if questions in Section 20b sought information about things such as 
immigration or were intended to find out about foreign governments or 
their agents trying to approach me, or my trying to approach them, for 
some sort of dealings with sensitive government information. 
 
Applicant contends that he maintained routine open communications with his 
FSO about everything related to his marriage to a foreign national and their efforts to 
legally reside together, either in the U.S. or in Mexico, until his wife could receive her 
U.S. permanent resident status.52 His e-mails of December 11-12, 2007, (“[We] are 
moving ahead with getting married and finding a home in Mexico)” and (“We will most 
likely move to the States as soon as the law allows. The CR-1 Visa for a spouse to 
immigrate is taking about 2 years before approval as of now”),53 and October 1, 2008 
(“We plan to keep a place to live in [Mexico] as well as in [the U.S.]. Eventually we 
would both like to be dual citizens.”),54 clearly state his intentions. The October 1, 2008, 
response from his FSO (“Please bring in her paperwork as well. I’d like to keep a paper 
trail so I can send when DSS requests it.”),55 confirms his contentions. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
51 Id. 
 
52 Tr. at  67-70. 
 
53 Applicant Exhibit A-2, supra note 16. 
 
54 Applicant Exhibit A-5, supra note 32. 
 
55 Applicant Exhibit A-5 (E-mail from FSO to Applicant, dated October 1, 2008). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”56 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”57   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”58 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.59  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
56 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
57 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
58 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
59 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”60 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”61 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:       
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
The foreign preference guideline notes several conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Under AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of 
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member” is potentially disqualifying. This includes but is not limited to: AG ¶ 
10(a)(1), “possession of a current foreign passport;” AG ¶ 10(a)(4), “residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;” and AG ¶ 10(a)(5), “using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country.” Similarly, under 
AG ¶ 10(b) “action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen” may raise security concerns. 
The Government has argued the applicability of AG ¶ 10(a) but concedes that 
none of the disqualifying conditions apply.62 Department Counsel likened the Mexican 
FM2 visa to a foreign passport,63 but that comparison is not accurate.  It is unclear if AG 
60 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
61 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
62 Tr. at 88. 
 
63 Id. at 91-92. 
 
10 
                                      
 
¶ 10(a) applies to native-born U.S. citizens such as Applicant, for the condition refers to 
actions taken “after becoming a U.S. citizen.” Even assuming that AG ¶ 10(a) does 
apply in this instance, there is no evidence that Applicant ever possessed a foreign 
passport. Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, married to a Mexican national, when 
confronted with the bureaucratic hurdles presented by the immigration laws of two 
countries, took several steps to maintain his marital relationship and residence. This is a 
love story, not a defiant act of foreign preference. Applicant and his wife could not 
legally reside together in the U.S. because she only possessed a visitor visa; they could 
not legally reside together in Mexico because he only possessed a visitor visa. 
Accordingly, to remain legal, they made applications to both countries for permanent 
resident status. In his situation, Applicant’s actions might eventually lead to dual 
citizenship with Mexico, but in order to successfully achieve that status, he would have 
had to maintain his residency in Mexico, something he chose not to do once his wife 
obtained her permanent U.S. resident visa. He entertained the “romanticized” desire of 
eventually owning a residence in Mexico, a desire his wife does not share. He also 
openly discussed the possibility that his wife some day might share in a rather modest 
inheritance, but that is merely speculation. The evidence supports the application of AG 
¶¶ 10(a)(4), and 10(b), as well as the partial application of 10(a)(5). AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) does 
not apply. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign preference.  Under AG ¶ 11(b), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship.”  Applicant took the first steps towards dual citizenship when he applied for 
the Mexican FM2 visa and resided in Mexico from January 3, 2008 to April 15, 2008. He 
never came close to satisfying the essential Mexican citizenship requirements, however, 
for he withdrew his application and had his FM2 visa cancelled. Applicant’s action 
presents not only an expressed willingness to renounce a potential dual citizenship, but 
also the actual act of doing so. AG ¶ 11(b) applies. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative,” may raise security concerns. The Government has argued that 
Applicant’s omissions of critical information pertaining to his application for, and receipt 
of, a Mexican FM2 visa provides sufficient evidence of deliberate falsifications. One 
possible alternative which must be examined is that his actions were the result of simple 
oversight or negligence on his part. Pending further comments below, AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) tentatively apply. 
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. Under AG ¶ 17(a), evidence that “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts” is potentially mitigating.  Similarly, AG ¶ 17(b) 
applies where “the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel 
or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically concerning the security 
clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide 
the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully.” Also, when “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress,” AG ¶ 17(e) may apply. 
 
As noted above, Applicant attributes his failure to specifically list his application 
for the Mexican FM2 visa to confusion rather than an intentional concealment. He 
contends that he maintained routine open communications with his FSO about 
everything related to his marriage to a foreign national and their efforts to legally reside 
together, either in the U.S. or in Mexico, until his wife could receive her U.S. permanent 
resident status. His December 2007 and October 2008 e-mails to his FSO clearly state 
his intentions. The October 2008, response of his FSO confirms his contentions, and 
leads to the conclusion that the comment regarding maintaining a paper trail for the 
benefit of DSS, is confusing. Applicant’s full multi-year disclosures to his FSO well 
before the SOR was issued clearly contradicts the Government’s contentions that 
Applicant’s SF 86 omission was a deliberate falsification or concealment of the facts 
pertaining to his personal conduct or relationship with the Mexican Government. AG ¶¶ 
17(a), 17(b), and 17(e) apply. Furthermore, I find Applicant’s explanations are credible 
in his denial of deliberate falsification.64 
64 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider 
the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. 
[Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had 
established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to 
the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).   
 
12 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some disqualifying evidence regarding Applicant’s conduct and actions. 
Applicant and his wife could not legally reside together in either the U.S. or Mexico 
because they each possessed only a visitor visa for the other’s country of residence. To 
remain legal, they made applications to both countries for permanent resident status. 
Applicant’s actions might eventually lead to dual citizenship with Mexico, but in order to 
successfully achieve that status, he would have had to maintain his residency in Mexico 
and eventually gain Mexican citizenship. Also, when completing his e-QIP, he failed to 
understand the necessity of total inclusion of all the Mexican immigration facts pertaining 
to his application. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant maintained routine open communications with his FSO about everything 
related to his marriage to a foreign national and their efforts to legally reside together, 
either in the U.S. or in Mexico, until his wife could receive her U.S. permanent resident 
status. Love and marital responsibility for his wife, not foreign preference for Mexico, 
prompted Applicant to explore every possible avenue, including becoming a permanent 
resident and eventual citizen of Mexico. Likewise improper or inadequate advice from 
his FSO caused him to believe his routine status correspondence was being gathered 
for the benefit of DSS. Applicant did nothing to hide his relationship with his wife or with 
the Mexican immigration authorities. To the contrary, he was open with the FSO and the 
investigator. While his e-QIP disclosures might not have been thorough enough for 
some, he candidly commented on his responses. When his wife received her U.S. 
permanent resident visa, he withdrew his application and had his FM2 visa cancelled. 
(See AG & 2(a)(1), AG & 2(a)(2), AG & 2(a)(3), AG & 2(a)(4), AG & 2(a)(5), AG & 
2(a)(6), AG & 2(a)(7), and AG & 2(a)(9).)  
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no substantial questions or doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
foreign preference and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
