 
 
 
 
1
                                                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-01739 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Stephanie C.  Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dawn M. Laubach, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On December 2, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). On September 18, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 16, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On January 22, 2010, DOHA assigned the case 
 
 
 
 
2
to me. On February 5, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for 
February 24, 2010. The case was heard as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. She offered exhibits marked as Tabs 1 through 13 into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on March 4, 2010.  The record 
remained open until March 15, 2010, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional information.  On that day, Applicant submitted an exhibit that I marked as Tab 
14 and admitted into evidence without objection.                                                         
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations contained in 
SOR ¶ 1, except those alleged in ¶ 1.b, 1.g, and 1.o. She denied the allegations 
contained in SOR ¶ 2. She provided extensive information in support of her answers.  
 
 Applicant is 37-years-old, married, and has a five-year-old daughter. In March 
2002, she earned an associate’s degree in information technology. She is completing a 
bachelor’s degree in database administration. Her husband works for the airline 
industry. 
 
 In April 2002, Applicant purchased a house with the assistance of her father. She 
and her husband (then fiancé) intended to rent the house for a year before getting 
married and moving into it. They planned to have the tenants’ rent cover the mortgage 
and to use their salaries to pay other debts.  About two months after the tenants moved 
into the house, they broke the lease and moved out. As a result, Applicant became 
responsible for the mortgage. At the time, she had just finished her associate’s degree 
and obtained a position as a help desk technician. Her $24,000 salary was insufficient 
to cover the mortgage and pay her bills.1 She decided to pay the mortgage and stopped 
making minimal payments on other bills, including credit cards. (Tr. 53.) In December 
2002, she and her husband married, and she moved into the house with her husband, 
who had lived there since the tenants left. By January 2003, her debts started to 
become delinquent. (Tr.  64.)  
 
 In November 2005, Applicant began working for federal contractors and earning 
about $40,000 annually. By 2008, she and her husband had a combined income of 
slightly less than a $100,000. During 2009, she earned $89,000 as a database 
administrator and her husband earned about $30,000 for a combined income of over 
$100,000. (Tr. 85-86.) They are financially stable and current with all of their expenses 
and obligations. (Tr. 54.) 
 
  Subsequent to completing her first e-QIP, on December 12, 2008, Applicant met 
with a government investigator to discuss her finances. During that meeting, she 
reviewed her credit bureau report (CBR) for the first time and learned of the number of 
reported delinquent debts. (Tr. 27.) About a month later, she sought credit counseling 
                                            
1Prior to this position, Applicant worked as a Hospice care aide and earned $9,000 annually.  
 
 
 
 
3
with a firm in order to resolve or consolidate the debts. A counselor with the firm advised 
her that they could not help her because the debts were too old. (Tr. 92.)  In March 
2009, she and her husband enrolled in a 13-week financial counseling course. (Tr. 91-
93; Tab 14 at 7.). After finishing the course, she implemented techniques for 
responsible financial management that she has continued to follow. (Tr. 57.) In October 
2009, she consulted with another consumer credit counseling service for assistance 
with resolving her old debts. The counselor performed a financial analysis and 
established a suggested budget. He advised her to dispute all old debts listed on her 
credit bureau reports in accordance with the applicable credit laws, which she did. (Tab 
10.) 
  
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from October 2008, December 2008, and 
July 2009, the SOR alleged that Applicant accumulated 17 delinquent debts totaling 
$24,522. (GE 2, 3, 4.) The majority of the debts accrued between 2000 and 2004. The 
status of each debt is listed below: 
 
 Debts Paid 
 
1. (¶ 1.a) The $134 debt was paid in November 2009. (Tab 1.)  
 
2. (¶ 1.c) The $59 debt was paid in November 2009. (Tab 2.)   
 
3. (¶ 1.q) The $319 debt was paid in October 2009. (Tab 3.) 
 
 Debts Disputed 
 
4. (¶ 1.b) In October and November 2009, Applicant disputed the $602 debt 
owed to a credit card company, as not being her debt. (Tab 5.) A November 
2009 CBR noted the dispute. (Tab 9.) She denies owing the debt.  
 
5. (¶ 1.g) In October 2009, Applicant disputed the $560 debt owed to a bank 
credit card. (Tab 6.) In November 2009, the debt was deleted from the credit 
bureau reports. (Tab 6a.) 
 
6. (¶ 1.o) In October 2009, Applicant disputed the $3,710 debt alleged to be 
owed to a health club. (Tab 7.)  The debt does not appear on the February 
2010 credit bureau report. (Tab 9, 10a.) 
 
 Debt Being Paid 
 
     7.  (¶ 1.i) The $1,786 debt is owed to the university which she attends. She was 
unaware of it until she reviewed her credit bureau report in December 2008. 
Generally, the student loan carrier sent her tuition payments to the school. 
She never received a bill for that unpaid amount. She started making $100 
monthly payments in February 2010. (Tr.  35; Tab 4a.)   
 
 
 
 
 
4
 
 
 Debts Being Resolved 
 
8 -10. (¶¶ 1.d, 1.e and 1.f)  These three alleged debts total $5,476 and are owed    
to the same credit card company. In 2002, the delinquent debt was $685. 
Applicant‘s attorney recently located the current creditor. She thinks the debt 
will be resolved for $205. (Tab 14 at 4.) 
 
11.  (¶ 1.h) The $464 debt is owed to a bank credit card.  She is willing to pay the 
debt, but is unable to locate the current creditor. 
 
12. (¶ 1.j) The $2,262 debt is owed to a company for a computer she purchased 
in 2002 and returned when she could not afford the payments. In October 
2009, she wrote the computer company to inquire about the debt. (Tab 12.) 
She is willing to pay the debt, but has not received a response from the 
creditor. (Tr. 106.)  
 
13. (¶ 1.k) The $1,165 debt is owed to a bank credit card. She sent a letter to the 
creditor in October 2009, but did not receive a response. She is willing to pay 
the debt, but is unable to resolve it. (Tr. 75; Tab 5a.)  
 
 14-15. (¶¶ 1.l, 1.m) These duplicate debts total $6,126. Applicant has attempted 
to resolve this debt since October 2009. (Tab 13.) Her attorney is unable to 
obtain the name of the current creditor, in order to resolve it. (Tab 14 at 5.)  
 
16. (¶ 1.n) The $1,204 debt is owed to a department store. She is willing to pay 
the debt, but is unable to locate the current owner of the debt. (Tr. 106.)  
 
17. (¶ 1.p) The $655 debt is owed to a credit card company. She is willing to pay 
the debt, but is unable to locate the current owner of the debt. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 In summary, Applicant has addressed or attempted to address each debt. She 
paid $512 to creditors, is paying the university bill of $1,786, and successfully disputed 
$4,872 of debt. She is willing to pay or resolve the remaining $17,300 debt if she 
receives a response from the creditors to her letters. She submitted a copy of her 
budget. Her family’s net monthly income is $6,840. After paying expenses, she has 
approximately $2,100 remaining for other items and debt reduction. (Tab 10 at 10.) She 
saves a large portion of that money. (Tr. at 83.)  
 
 Since working for federal contractors, Applicant has completed two public trust 
applications and one security clearance application. On November 13, 2007, Applicant 
completed her initial questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF-85P). In response to 
“Question 22: Your Financial Record: b: Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any 
loan or financial obligation? Include loans or obligations funded or guaranteed by the 
Federal Government,” she answered “No,” and did not disclose the 17 debts listed in 
 
 
 
 
5
the SOR. On September 17, 2008, Applicant completed another SF-85P. In response to 
“Question 22: Your Financial Record: b: Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any 
loan or financial obligation,” she answered “No,” and again did not disclose the 17 
debts. She interpreted the questions as seeking information about current debts and 
obligations, not old debts. (Tr. 31.) She did not know until her meeting with an 
investigator in December 2008 that she owed money to the university. (Tr. 34.) She 
denied that she intentionally falsified the SF-85Ps. (Tr. 30-31.) Her explanation for the 
omissions is credible. 
  
 On December 2, 2008, Applicant’s employer asked her to complete an e-QIP that 
same day. She did not know that the application related to obtaining a secret security 
clearance or the significance of accurate disclosure. She thought it was required for 
updating her records. She did not realize that she needed a credit report or other 
financial records available. (Tr. 73; GE 1) In response to “Section 27: Financial Record 
b. In the last 7 years have you had your wages garnished or had any property 
repossessed for any reason,” she answered “No.” She was unaware that a timeshare 
property, on which she stopped making payments in early 2000s because she could not 
afford the payments, became a repossession in July 2003.  She denied that she 
intentionally withheld that information from the Government. (Tr. 25-27; GE 5.) Her 
explanation for the omission is credible. 
 
 In response to “Section 28. Financial Delinquencies: Your Financial 
Delinquencies: a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debt(s),” and “Section 28: b. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts(s),” 
she answered “No,” and did not list the 17 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. She 
knew that she had old debts, but did not think they fell within the seven-year time frame 
because she obtained a mortgage in 2002, which she knew required an acceptable 
credit rating, and she had not received any information about the debts over the years. 
As to debts delinquent more than 90 days, she again interpreted the question to inquire 
into the status of current on-going obligations. She was not delinquent on those 
obligations. She denied that she intentionally withheld the information. She emphasized 
that she did not have her credit report or financial records available when her employer 
asked her to complete the form in one day. (Tr. 29.) Her explanations for the omissions 
are credible.  
 
 Applicant was a candid and forthright witness. She demonstrated an in-depth 
knowledge about her financial situation and delinquent debts. She exhibited a strong 
sense of fiscal responsibility. She was remorseful about her unpaid earlier delinquent 
debts, but asserted her commitment to living debt free and resolving her obligations.  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
6
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
 
 
 
 
7
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
Applicant accumulated the majority of her delinquent debt between 2000 and 
2004, when she had insufficient money to pay them. In early 2009, she began to resolve 
them. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.  
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
 
 
8
The bulk of Applicant’s debts accumulated six to ten years ago, when she 
purchased a home that she intended to rent for a year. When her tenants left after two 
months instead of one year, she was unable to pay both the mortgage and previously 
incurred debts because of her limited income. As a result, she ceased paying older 
debts, which then became delinquent. Given her present salary, those circumstances 
are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.   
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(b) has some application due to the unforeseen circumstances 
mentioned above. However, this mitigating condition has limited application because 
she did not present any documentation to demonstrate that she attempted to manage 
the debts until early 2009, after she learned of the Government’s security concerns. 
 
Applicant presented evidence that shortly after learning of her delinquent debts 
she sought credit counseling in early 2009. She participated in a 13-week financial 
planning course and obtained additional credit counseling in October 2009. At this time, 
she has paid three debts, is paying one of the debts, successfully disputed three debts, 
and has attempted to resolve the remaining ten debts with her attorney’s assistance. 
There are clear indications that the problem is being resolved and is under control, 
warranting the application of AG ¶ 20(c). Her payments to four creditors demonstrate a 
good-faith effort to pay and resolve debts, and trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(d). She 
is also willing to pay the outstanding debts, if she is able to locate the current creditor.   
 
Applicant disputed numerous debts listed on her credit bureau reports. As a 
result, at least three debts were deleted from recent credit bureau reports. She provided 
proof of those disputes, which is sufficient for the application of AG ¶ 20(e). There is no 
evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(f). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified questions related 
to her delinquent debts on two SF-85Ps and an e-QIP; to wit, she failed to disclose a 
timeshare repossession and debts that were more than 90 and 180 days delinquent. 
The Government contended that those omissions may raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 16: 
 
 
 
 
 
9
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied that she intentionally omitted information about the delinquent 
debts. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has the 
burden of proving it.  An omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. (See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)) 
 
 Applicant explained that she misinterpreted the questions on the SF-85Ps. She 
thought the questions inquired whether her current obligations were delinquent and not 
whether she had ever had delinquent debts. After reviewing the language of the 
questions, her explanations are credible. On the day that she was required to complete 
the e-QIP, she did not have a CBR to review or her financial records. She was unaware 
of the importance of accuracy while filling out the form, and in fact, did not realize that it 
was a security clearance application. At the time, she did not know that a previously 
purchased timeshare had become a repossession in 2003. Although she knew she had 
old debts, she did not think they fell within the seven-year timeframe, especially given 
the knowledge that she obtained a mortgage in 2002. As to the debts older than 90 
days, she again misinterpreted the question as she had done in the SF-85Ps. Based on 
her demeanor and candor while testifying, her explanations are credible. The omission 
of the information may have been the result of a lack of diligence, but it was not 
intentional. Hence, the evidence did not establish deliberate falsification. The allegations 
contained in SOR ¶ 2 are found in her favor. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
10
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 37-year-old intelligent, 
candid, and hard-working woman. She has successfully worked for federal contractors 
since 2005 and within the last two years has obtained significant salary increases.   
Prior to 2004, she accumulated delinquent debt that she chose not to address because 
of limited income and possible immaturity. After learning of the Government’s concerns 
regarding her delinquent debts in December 2008, she obtained credit counseling and 
financial planning. She assumed responsibility for her debts and pursued resolution of 
them. She is committed to financial solvency and established a budget that 
accommodates her goal. Based on the evidence and her testimony, it is unlikely that 
similar financial problems will recur, as she is aware of the negative effect that future 
delinquencies will have on her eligibility to maintain a security clearance and retain her 
employment. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising under financial considerations and personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.q:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a through 2.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                    
             _________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
