                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-02613 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 17, 2008, Applicant submitted his electronic security clearance 
application (e-QIP). On September 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 5, 2009. He answered 
the SOR in writing on October 19, 2009, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 24, 
2009, and I received the case assignment on December 2, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on December 2, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 15, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 28, 2009. I granted Applicant’s request 
to keep the record open until January 8, 2010, to submit additional matters. Applicant 
did not submit any exhibits by that date. The record closed on January 8, 2010. Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated he received the hearing notice on December 
2, 2009. (Tr. 9). I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 
days notice before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days 
notice. (Tr. 9)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1 and ¶ 
2 of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 45 years old, married, and works for a defense contractor in the 
telecommunications business. His wife had a job with the U.S. Government that she 
resigned when she realized she did not like the location to which she was transferred. 
She has not found comparable paying employment in the city to which they returned 
after her resignation. Applicant resigned from a job he had because it involved too much 
weekly travel. He found employment with the defense contractor in the city to which 
they returned after his wife quit her job. (Tr. 20-25) 
 
 Applicant has 11 delinquent debts totaling $25,217. None of these debts have 
been resolved. Applicant explained his and his wife’s decreased incomes from prior 
years have adversely affected their financial ability to repay these debts. He consulted 
with a financial counseling service and contemplated filing bankruptcy. (Tr. 29, 30) 
 
 Applicant owes the following debts and their current status is: 
 
a. A utility bill for $518 (subparagraph 1.a) owed from their 
former home. Applicant thought the debt was paid at the 
closing. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 28, 31-33; Exhibits 2-5) 
  
b. A debt owed to a bank in the amount of $1,577 
(subparagraph 1.b). Applicant states he does not remember 
the precise origin of this debt. He speculated it could be an 
insufficient fund check or a credit card debt. He contacted 
the bank but it wanted a large down payment on the debt 
 
3 
 
 
that he could not afford. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 33, 34; 
Exhibits 2-5) 
 
c. A utility bill for $104 (subparagraph 1.c) that Applicant 
thought was paid from his house closing funds when he sold 
his home in March 2007. Applicant, at that time, was starting 
to fall behind on his house payments. He had refinanced the 
mortgage and made some improvements to the house. 
Selling soon after he completed those changes, he did not 
realize the profit he hoped to get. The creditor told Applicant 
it did not receive the payment from the closing. Applicant has 
not verified payment with the attorney or real estate agent at 
the closing. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 28, 29, 34, 35; 
Exhibits 2-5) 
 
d. Applicant owes a jewelry company $2,294 (subparagraph 
1.d) for a ring he purchased for his wife in 2006. He has not 
contacted the company and has no money to pay this debt. 
It is unresolved. (Tr. 35, 36; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
e. Applicant owes a credit union $6,352 (subparagraph 1.e) on 
a loan. Applicant cannot now recall for what purpose he 
borrowed the money. He opined it might be a car loan or a 
credit card debt. He has not contacted the credit union about 
repaying the loan or even to determine the nature of the 
debt. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 37, 38; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
f. Applicant owes another credit union $731 (subparagraph 1.f) 
for a returned check and insufficient funds fees from 2007. 
Applicant has not contacted the credit union about repaying 
this debt. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 39; Exhibits 2-5)  
 
g. Applicant owes a bank on two loans in the amounts of 
$2,344 and $6,275, respectively, obtained as part of the 
refinancing on his former home (subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h). 
He used the money to renovate the house. He has not 
repaid the loans nor has he contacted the creditor about the 
loans. These debts remain unresolved. (Tr. 40, 41; Exhibits 
2-5)  
 
h. Applicant owes an auto manufacturer’s financing subsidiary 
$4,703 on an auto lease (subparagraph 1.i). He could not 
continue to make the payments on the auto lease and 
arranged for the car to be repossessed in 2007. He has not 
repaid this debt and it is unresolved. (Tr. 42-44; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 
4 
 
 
i. Applicant owes a creditor $75 (subparagraph 1.j) for a debt 
he does not remember or recognize. He has not tried to 
contact the creditor to repay the debt. This debt is 
unresolved. (Tr. 44, 45; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
j. The final debt listed in the SOR owed by Applicant is one for 
$244 (subparagraph 1.k) to his previous auto insurance 
company. Applicant changed his auto insurance carrier and 
thinks this amount is the balance owed at the termination of 
the contract. Applicant changed insurance carriers when he 
purchased a car to replace his previous auto damaged in an 
accident that was not his fault. He has not done anything to 
resolve this debt with the creditor. (Tr. 45-50; Exhibits 2-5)                
 
 Applicant owes $3,000 annually for various fees on a vacation property he owns 
by a lake. In 2009, he was able to pay the arrearages on these fees with the financial 
help of his family. He owes them $4,000 for that help. He will owe another $900 in 
January 2010 on that property. He will try to sell the property and two jet skis located 
there in the spring. He bought the property when his income was higher in 2006. (Tr. 
60-62) 
 
 Applicant earned $48,500 annually in 2007. When his wife worked for a U.S. 
Government agency in 2007 and had 28 years of service, she earned about $42,000 
annually. She quit that job and they returned to their former city of residence and had to 
take lower paying jobs. Applicant now earns about $39,500 and his wife earns $16,500 
annually. Their monthly net income is about $3,884, based on their testimony at the 
hearing. Their monthly expenses, including rent, gasoline, telephones, insurance, food, 
and utilities, total $1,725. They would seem to have a net discretionary income of about 
$2,000 monthly but claim to have no savings or spare money. They do have three dogs 
which they admit “are a little bit expensive.” One of the dogs needs a $3,000 hip 
replacement operation and Applicant is saving money for that procedure. (Tr. 23, 51-60, 
71-78) 
 
 Applicant has no credit cards. He uses a debit card or cash for his purchases. 
Applicant’s wife has been ill since 2004. She has $5,000 in medical debts. She is trying 
to repay $25 monthly to her physician because that amount is all she can afford now. 
The medical debts are only in her name. (Tr. 55, 59, 60, 83, 86) 
 
 Applicant signed his e-QIP on December 17, 2008. He did not disclose his 
automobile repossession in 2007 in response to Section 27 (b)(“In the last 7 years, have 
you had your wages garnished or had any property repossessed for any reason?”). 
Applicant did not disclose any of his financial delinquencies in answer to Sections 28 (a) 
(“In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”) and (b) 
(“Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”). Applicant explained that 
never having completed such a government form as the e-QIP previously, and not 
remembering his debts, he asked his supervisor for guidance. Applicant stated he 
 
5 
 
 
followed his supervisor’s advice which was that if the debts are not “blatant” that 
Applicant could not think of them immediately, then he should answer the questions with 
a negative response. Applicant claims he learned of 90% of his delinquent debts when 
he was interviewed by the government investigator. Applicant did not disclose any debts 
to the investigator. (Tr. 63-66, 89)  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline under AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could 
raise security concerns. There are two disqualifying conditions that apply: 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant accumulated 11 delinquent debts totaling $25,217. These debts have 
existed since at least 2006. Applicant has not expended any effort to contact the 
creditors and arrange repayment plans. None of the debts are resolved.  
 
The AG ¶ 20 guideline contains six mitigating conditions. One of these mitigating 
conditions could apply: 
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant’s wife resigned her government job in 2007 for a variety of reasons, 
and they returned to the city in which they formerly lived. When that action occurred, 
she cut her income in half. Applicant decreased his income by nearly $10,000 with that 
move. However, before they moved initially they were financially overextended with their 
jewelry debt, the mortgage refinancing, two credit union loans, a leased car, and the 
other debts listed in the SOR. Applicant purchased lake-front property which now costs 
him $3,000 annually that he cannot afford. His spending priorities are incorrect.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The change of employment was a voluntary act by Applicant and his wife. His 
wife’s medical problems were not shown by Applicant to have affected his ability to 
repay debts he incurred after treatment started. Applicant did not show that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Instead, he showed he spent money he could not 
repay. Applicant demonstrated he used money he should not have spent on his lake-
front property and his pets that should have been used to pay his debts. This mitigating 
condition is not applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose on his e-QIP his 11 delinquent debts that are listed in 
the SOR. Applicant knew he had debts, just not the precise creditors and amounts. Yet, 
he deliberately did not disclose them anywhere in the e-QIP.  
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
mitigating condition may have some applicability: 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
  
Applicant explained his deliberate failure to disclose his delinquent debts on the 
e-QIP as based on the advice he received from his supervisor. He did not produce the 
supervisor or a statement from that person supporting his assertion. Therefore, 
Applicant’s credibility is in question on his assertion.  
 
The mitigating condition only applies if his supervisor is an “authorized personnel 
or legal counsel.” His private company supervisor is not a person authorized to advise 
Applicant on the security clearance process, as a government adjudicator or security 
manager would be. Applicant did not show his supervisor had any experience, power, or 
color of authority to instruct him specifically concerning the security clearance 
application process. The supervisor is empowered only in the assignment and 
management of work duties. Therefore, this mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
Applicant admitted he falsified his answers to Section 28 on the e-QIP in his 
answer to the SOR. He offered no further explanation to rebut his own admission. His 
admission cannot overcome his unpersuasive explanation of his supervisor’s role in the 
answering of the e-QIP questions.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
 
9 
 
 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an adult who borrowed 
money and could not repay it. He has made no effort to repay it. When asked by the 
U.S. Government on the e-QIP about any delinquent finances or repossessions in the 
past seven years, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose any such information. 
Applicant’s actions on both issues are frequent and recent. His actions were voluntary. 
There is no rehabilitation or behavioral changes shown by Applicant. The potential for 
coercion, duress, pressure, and exploitation exist because of the magnitude of the debts 
and Applicant’s willful failure to disclose them. Finally, Applicant’s financial situation has 
existed for at least three years and his testimony showed it will continue in the future 
until he pays his debts by increasing his income, cutting his expenses, or resolving them 
in some legal manner. Applicant has done nothing to date to resolve any of the debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his Financial 
Considerations and Personal Conduct. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.k:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                    
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
