 
 
 
 
1
                                                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-03111 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Stephanie C.  Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On November 13, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). On October 22, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 20, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On February 2, 2010, DOHA assigned the case 
to me. On February 5, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for 
 
 
 
 
2
February 24, 2010. The case was heard as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. He offered Applicant Exhibits A through D into evidence without objection. AE 
A is Applicant’s Amended Answer. DOHA received the hearing transcript on March 4, 
2010  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.d, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.k through 1.m. He denied the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.e, 
1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.n. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and married to his second wife. He was married to his 
first wife from 1993 until 1997. He has a 14-year-old daughter from that marriage. He 
has two children, ages 11 and 7, from another relationship. He served in the U.S. Army 
from 1991 to 1996. He was an E-4 at the time of his honorable discharge. He held a 
Top Secret security clearance while in the Army. (GE 1 at 40.) He recently completed 
six hours of college credit.  
 
 In October 2008, Applicant began working for a defense contractor as a data 
analyst in the health system that serves the Air Force. From 1998 to October 2008, he 
held various jobs, and was also unemployed from July 2005 to October 2005. (GE 1.) 
Periodically, he has worked both as a full-time and part-time certified scuba diving 
instructor.  
 
 According to the credit bureaus reports (CBR), Applicant began accumulating 
delinquent debts in April 2002 up to January 2009. He attributed them to periods of 
underemployment and medical bills for his children when he did not have insurance. (Tr. 
at 50.)  In a June 2009 Financial Statement that he submitted with Interrogatories, he 
stated that “I am paying child support for 3 children and this job is allowing me to 
reestablish myself financially. I am in the process of paying off my creditors a little at a 
time.” (GE 2 at 61.) 
  
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from December 2008, February 2009, and 
September 2009, the SOR alleged that Applicant accumulated 14 delinquent debts 
totaling $14,790. The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
1. (¶ 1.a) This $5,359 debt arose after Applicant started an on-line shopping 
site. After working in the business for one month, he decided that he did not 
want to continue the business and returned all supplies. He attempted to 
settle the matter with the creditor and does not believe that he owes said 
amount. The correct amount is $4,098 as alleged in ¶ 1.n, which is a 
duplicate debt. (Tr. at 22-25.) It is unresolved.  
 
2. (¶ 1.b) The $85 debt is owed to a storage company since March 2007. He 
contacted the creditor for an invoice three weeks ago, in order to pay the 
 
 
 
 
3
debt. He has not received a response. He stated that he intended to follow up 
with the creditor. (Tr. at 26.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
3. (¶ 1.c) The $428 debt is owed to a cellular phone company. He called the 
company to set up an installment payment plan. The company demanded 
payment in full. He intends to begin sending small payments in the future. (Tr. 
at 27.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
4. (¶ 1.d) The $539 debt is owed to a bank for a duplicate salary payment he 
received from a previous employer. In November 2009, he worked out a 
settlement for $269, consisting of six monthly payments of $44. He has not 
sent a payment to date. (AE C; Tr. at 28, 42) The debt is unresolved. 
 
5. (¶ 1.e) The $316 debt is owed to a credit card company. He negotiated a 
settlement for $221. He agreed to make monthly payments to pay off the 
$114 balance, and transfer the remaining $107 balance to a new credit card 
that he will promptly pay. He sent the creditor $40. (AE B; Tr. at 29.) The debt 
is being resolved. 
 
6. (¶ 1.f) The $481 debt is owed to a credit card company. He contacted the 
creditor about making a future payment arrangement within 30 days. (Tr. at 
30.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
7.  (¶ 1.g) Applicant denied the $419 debt owed to a former apartment complex. 
He lived there but claims he paid the debt in 2001 or 2002. The new owner of 
the complex asserted that it did not have a record of the payment.  He 
disputed the debt in late 2009 and it was re-affirmed on the February 2009 
CBR. (GE 2 at 63.)  However, it does not appear on the August 2009 CBR. 
(GE 3 at 63; GE 3; Tr. at 30-32.) The debt appears to be resolved. 
 
8. (¶ 1.h) The $423 debt is owed to a jewelry company. Applicant claims he 
never purchased jewelry from that store and disputed the debt with the credit 
bureau. The debt was re-affirmed on the February 2009 CBR, but does not 
appear on an October 2009 CBR.1 (Tr. at 32-36.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
9. (¶ 1.i) The $117 debt is owed for medical services he received. He made a 
$10 payment on the bill.  (Tr. at 36-37.) The debt is being resolved.  
 
10.  (¶ 1.j) The $1,317 debt was owed to a cellular company. He contacted the 
company which agreed to bi-monthly payments of $50 that he will begin 
within 60 days. (Tr. at 37-38.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
                                            
1Applicant testified that he would submit the October 2009 CBR post-hearing. (Tr. at 36.) He did 
not do so.  
 
 
 
 
4
11.  (¶ 1.k) The $420 debt is owed to a creditor for a cash advance. He contacted 
the company to set up a $40 monthly repayment plan that he will begin within 
60 days. The debt is unresolved. 
 
12.  (¶ 1.l) The $492 debt is owed to a bank for unpaid checks that his former wife 
wrote. He will pay this debt through monthly payments after paying other 
debts. (Tr. at 39-41.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
13.  (¶ 1.m) The $301 debt is owed to a bank for unpaid checks written by his 
former wife. He intends to pay them after he pays other debts. (Tr. at 40.) The 
debt is unresolved. 
 
14.  (¶ 1.n) This $4,098 debt is a duplicate of the debt alleged in ¶ 1.a. (GE 4 at 
9.)  
 
 In summary, Applicant owes approximately $9,341 in delinquent debt. He 
contacted a credit counseling company about resolving them. After a free consultation, 
he decided that it would be more prudent to allocate $300 per month toward the 
reduction of his debts rather than pay the company $350 monthly to contact the 
creditors, negotiate a settlement, and manage his accounts. (Tr. at  43.) Since then, he 
spoke to his creditors about establishing monthly payment plans. (Tr. at 45.) He made 
payments on two debts. He intends to make small monthly payments on one or two 
debts at a time, until they are all paid. He does not earn enough money to pay all of 
them immediately. (Tr. at  45.)  
 
 Applicant submitted a budget in May 2009. His net monthly income was $1,721 
after standard deductions and child support payments of $450 were deducted for his 
three children. (Tr. at 46.) The child support is being paid through a garnishment. He 
believes he owes about $14,000 in child support arrears for his oldest child, which is 
being resolved through the garnishment. (Tr. at 47.) After paying monthly expenses, he 
has about $300 remaining at the end of the month. (Tr. at 42.) His friend is establishing 
a spreadsheet for his expenses and debts, so that he can slowly manage and pay off 
his debts.2 (Tr. at 52.) His current wife has lupus and is unable to work. He is not 
incurring additional expenses and does not use credit cards. (Tr. at 49.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter on his behalf. He stated that Applicant is one 
of his “top performers in both quality and quantity of work completed. Other than a 
singular episode with his finances, in which, he took action to correct, [Applicant] is a 
great worker and an essential member of this unit.” (AE D.) 
   
 
 
 
                                            
2Applicant testified that he would submit a copy of the spreadsheet post-hearing. (Tr. at 52.)  He 
did not do so. 
 
 
 
 
5
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
6
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise security concerns. Applicant began accumulating delinquent debt in April 
2002, which he has been unwilling or unable to resolve until recently. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The guideline includes five conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated when Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant=s 
financial worries arose in 2002 and continue to date. Hence, the problems are ongoing. 
This condition does not apply.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Some of Applicant’s debt 
accumulated as a result of medical bills and insufficient income for a number of years. 
Those circumstances were outside of his control. Because he did not present any 
evidence indicating that he attempted to manage his debts until 2009, this mitigating 
condition has limited application.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant did not participate in financial credit counseling, but 
he did meet with a credit counselor for a free consultation. After that meeting, he 
 
 
 
 
7
decided to personally contact his creditors and negotiate small monthly payments. To 
date, he has made payments on two debts and will begin repaying other debts in the 
near future, as money is available. There is some evidence to demonstrate that his 
financial obligations are slowly coming under control and that he is making an effort to 
repay creditors. These two mitigating conditions have partial application. 
 
In late 2008, Applicant disputed debts listed on his credit bureau reports. As a 
result, two creditors were deleted from his February 2009 CBR. There is some evidence 
to support the application of AG ¶ 20(e) that provides mitigation when “the individual 
has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause 
of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute 
or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 36-year-old man, who 
honorably served in the Army for five years and held a Top Secret security clearance. 
His current supervisor considers him to be an asset to his department. In 2002, 
Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties that resulted in the accumulation of 
delinquent debt that he did not begin to address until 2009. Some of those difficulties 
related to medical expenses and others occurred as a result of insufficient income over 
the years. Since obtaining a position with a defense contractor in October 2008, his 
financial situation has slowly improved. In 2009, he started taking steps to resolve his 
financial obligations by contacting his creditors. The delinquent debts alleged on the 
SOR total less than $10,000 and are manageable on his limited income. He 
understands the importance of paying off these debts and the employment 
 
 
 
 
8
consequences of failing to do so. Given that awareness, it is unlikely that similar 
problems will recur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
