                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05242 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 21, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 4, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 
2010. Applicant requested an expedited hearing and waived the 15-day notice 
requirement. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 15, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on March 17, 2010. Department Counsel moved to amend the 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
SOR, adding two allegations. After the amendment to the SOR, as discussed below, I 
granted a continuance of the case until April 5, 2010. DOHA received the transcript of 
the first hearing (Tr. I) on March 24, 2010, and the transcript of the second hearing (Tr. 
II) on April 9, 2010. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 At the first hearing on March 17, 2010, the Government offered Exhibits (GE) I 
through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without objection. 
 
 The Government did not offer any exhibits at the second hearing. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and offered AE H through Y, which were admitted without 
objection.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR, adding two allegations under 
Guideline F. Applicant did not object and the motion was granted. After the first hearing, 
Department Counsel provided Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, the amendments in writing. The 
amended allegations are SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. The allegations are as follows: 
 
g. You failed to file your Federal and state income tax returns for Tax Year 
2006 as required by law. 
 
h. You are delinquent on your Federal income taxes for Tax Year 2006. 
 
 A continuance was granted to permit Applicant time to respond to the 
amendment. After the second hearing was completed and the record closed, Applicant 
provided to Department Counsel additional exhibits. Department Counsel did not object 
to the exhibits being offered after the record closed or to their admission.1 I marked 
them AE Z and AA and they were admitted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f. He admitted allegations 
¶1.g and 1.h. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He graduated from college in 1980 and has a 
bachelor’s degree. He married in 1989 and divorced in 2001. He has a 12-year-old son. 
He worked as a project manager for a defense contractor in February 2009 until March 
2010. His job status is awaiting his security clearance determination.2  
1 HE II is Department Counsel’s response. 
 
2 Tr. 76. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant held a well-paying job in 2001. He described it as “the best job I had 
had.”3 The company downsized and he lost this job. This occurred during the same time 
he was going through a divorce. He continued to work, but was significantly 
underemployed on and off until he was hired by his present employer. He continued to 
look for better-paying jobs, but the market was difficult. He was required to continue to 
pay the amount of his child support payments originally awarded by the court, even 
though his income had been significantly reduced. He credibly testified he was barely 
able to pay his child support payments and provide necessities for himself. He 
occasionally got behind in paying his child support, but is presently current. His difficult 
financial situation continued for several years. In 2003, he obtained a better-paying job, 
but it was short-lived. At that time, he attempted a modification of his child support 
payments. When his income increased, the court denied the petition. A week later the 
company he worked for collapsed and he lost his job. His ex-wife moved to a different 
state. Applicant wanted to be closer to his son so he moved also. It took him about six 
months to find a job. From 2003 to 2006, he worked odd jobs and temporary jobs. He 
continued to be challenged to find work. He was unemployed from August 2006 to 
November 2006. He then found a job in the city where his son lived. He was doing 
adequately, until the economy slumped and his overtime hours were eliminated. Due to 
the schedule he was required to work for his employer, he could not work a second job. 
He was earning $10 an hour. He continued to meet his child support payments and only 
his basic needs.4  
 
In February 2009, when he was hired by his present employer, he began to earn 
a salary over $100,000. The following is the status of the debts alleged: 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment from 2004 for $32,044. It is associated with 
the second mortgage on his former home. The home was sold in a “short-sale” 
transaction, after his divorce. According to the divorce decree, Applicant was 
responsible for one-half of the debt, plus $500, and his wife was responsible for one-half 
of the debt, minus $500. The decree specifically prohibits the debt from being 
discharged in bankruptcy by one of the parties and requires that if it is discharged, the 
party is required to pay a lump sum alimony payment to the innocent party.5 Applicant 
stated after the divorce, and in violation of the decree, his ex-wife filed for bankruptcy 
and had the debt discharged. Hence, the creditor obtained the judgment against 
Applicant and is seeking full payment. Applicant planned to pay his half when his 
income increased, but was unable to do so because of his underemployment. He 
explained due to the complexity of the debt, he has hired an attorney. At the first 
hearing, he stated his attorney is presently negotiating a settlement of the debt. At his 
second hearing, he stated there was no further progress on resolving the debt. 
Applicant understands the judgment is against him and he will have to sue his ex-wife 
for her share of the debt. Applicant admitted he did not keep the creditor apprised of his 
3 Tr. I 15. 
 
4 Tr. I 15-23, 29, 77-78. 
 
5 AE F. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
address when he changed locations. He only recently began to address this judgment. 
No payments have made toward the debt. He stated he intends to pay it.6 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,491) was incurred in 2006. Applicant left his 
apartment when he could not pay the rent. He understood he owed one month’s rent, 
but disputes additional charges to the claim. He contacted the landlord after he moved, 
but the landlord initially refused to negotiate a settlement. He has since reached an 
agreement to settle the debt with payments of $915. He made two of the payments 
before the hearing and one final payment after the second hearing. After the record 
closed, he provided proof of his final payment.7 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1 c is for a credit card ($1,246). Applicant settled the debt for 
$500. He explained that a significant amount of the debt was for penalties and interest. 
He defaulted on the debt in 2006. He attempted to negotiate a lower minimum payment, 
but was unable. He explained he was not earning enough money to pay the debt. He 
paid the settlement amount on February 2, 2010.8 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($65) was credit protection for a credit card. He incurred 
the debt in 2006 or 2007. He stated he paid the debt in September 2009. He did not 
provide documentary proof he paid the debt. After the record closed, Applicant stated in 
writing that he settled the debt by a phone payment and the collection agency has not 
provided a confirmation letter.9 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($144) is for telephone services. Applicant provided proof 
he made a payment to this creditor. There are several accounts with the same creditor. 
It appears this account was settled and paid.10  
 
Applicant initially stated he did not know who the creditor was in the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.f ($2,968). He believed he was a victim of identity theft. He stated he contacted the 
creditor and they had no record that he owed a debt to them. He stated he disputed the 
debt with the credit bureaus. At his second hearing, Applicant conceded that after 
further research, he determined the debt belonged to him and he settled it for $1,500 on 
April 1, 2010.11 
 
Applicant stated he was initially earning $105,000 annually, which was increased 
to $114,000, from the job where he was employed before his security clearance 
6 Tr. I 24-37; Tr. II 34-35; Answer. 
 
7 Tr. I 38-48; Tr. II 35; Answer, AE H, Z, AA. 
 
8 Tr. I 48-56; Tr. II 14-15; Answer; AE J. 
 
9 Tr. I 56-65; AE Z. 
 
10 Tr. I 65-86; Answer. 
 
11 Tr. I 68-74; Tr. II 12-14, 37; AE I. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
became an issue. That job allowed him to get his finances back on track and pay his 
creditors. He does not live beyond his means. He currently has $1,600 in expendable 
income a month after paying his expenses.12  
 
Applicant was questioned as to whether he filed and paid his past federal and 
state income taxes returns and taxes. He admitted he did not file or pay his 2006 federal 
or state income tax returns and taxes on time. He knew he owed taxes for that year. He 
stated he filed his 2007 federal income tax returns. At his second hearing, Applicant 
admitted he did not file his 2006 and 2007 federal or state income tax returns until April 
1, 2010. He explained that in 2006, after completing his federal tax return form, he 
determined he owed taxes and did not have the money to pay his taxes. He then made 
a decision not to file his federal income tax returns. He did not contact the Internal 
Revenue Service at the time to work out a payment plan. He also completed the 2006 
state income tax return form and determined he was to receive a small refund. He did 
not think the amount was enough to help him pay the amount owed on his federal tax 
returns, so he did not file the state income tax return. He took the same action on his 
2007 federal and state income tax returns.13 He was entitled to a refund from the state 
for 2007. Applicant paid $117.01 and $1,273.13, on April 1, 2010 and April 2, 2010, 
respectively, for his delinquent federal tax payments.14 He also learned he owed $73.39 
for his 2001 federal income taxes, and $141.52 for his 2002 federal income taxes. He 
paid all of the amounts.15 
 
Applicant’s explanations for failing to file his federal and state income tax returns, 
was because it was a very low point in his life and he was severely underemployed and 
did not have the money. Applicant stated he intended to pay his delinquent debts, but 
financially could not afford it until he began his latest employment.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
12 Tr. I 74-76, 84-85, Tr. II 39. 
 
13 The Government did not allege Applicant’s failure to file his 2007 federal and state income tax returns. I 
have not considered this information for disqualifying purposes, but have considered it when analyzing 
the whole person. 
 
14 AE X. 
 
15 Tr. I 87-96; Tr. II 18-34, 35-37; AE Y.  
 
16 Tr. II 17-20. 
 
6 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant had six delinquent debts that he failed to pay for several years. He 
deliberately failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for 2006. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered the following under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he still owes a large judgment and other 
debts remain delinquent and unresolved. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant experienced a lengthy period of underemployment and a period of 
unemployment. He also went through a divorce that impacted his finances and his child 
support payments were not adjusted based on his decreased income. I find these 
conditions were beyond Applicant’s control. I find Applicant’s failure to file his 2006 
federal and state income tax returns was intentional, deliberate, and within his control. 
In order for mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) to be fully applicable, Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. I find to a certain extent he did act 
responsibly by ensuring he continued to pay his child support. Since being gainfully 
employed with a more significant income, he has addressed some of his delinquent 
debts. However, with regard to his federal and state income tax returns, he did not act 
responsibly. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. There is no evidence 
Applicant has received financial counseling. He has taken some action in paying some 
of his delinquent debts, but he still has a judgment and other debts that remain 
unresolved. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) only partially apply. Applicant 
disputes he owes the total amount of the mortgage debt in SOR ¶ 1(a). It appears his 
ex-wife violated the divorce decree and the creditor obtained a judgment against 
Applicant. The judgment was entered against Applicant, and although he disputes that 
he owes the total amount, that is a matter he must pursue against his ex-wife. Hence, I 
find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(e) only partially applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
 
9 
 
 
college graduate, and despite his financial problems he has attempted to stay current 
on his child support payments. He experienced a long series of difficult financial 
situations. He lost well-paying jobs and was underemployed for long periods of time. He 
did what was necessary so he could stay close to his son. Due to his unemployment 
and underemployment, he accumulated delinquent debts. He has paid some of the 
debts, but others remain unresolved. Applicant has a large judgment for his second 
mortgage. Applicant’s finances are a concern, but he appears to be addressing them. 
However, the more serious concern is Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state 
income tax returns for 2006 and 2007. He did not file the returns until the issue was 
raised at his hearing. After the hearing, he filed the returns and paid the delinquent 
federal taxes he owed for 2006 and 2007. He also learned he owed federal taxes for 
other years and paid the amounts owed. Applicant acknowledged he made a conscious 
decision not to file his federal income tax returns because he did not have the money to 
pay them. His attitude and actions raise doubts about his reliability, judgment, and 
trustworthiness. He consciously chose to ignore his civic and legal responsibility. It was 
only after the issue was brought up at his hearing, that he fufilled his legal duty.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant’ 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
