                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02708 
 SSN  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: ,1 Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his falsification of 
security clearance applications and his contacts with relatives in Egypt. He mitigated the 
financial considerations and outside activities security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted three security clearance applications, the last one on June 1, 
2006. On June 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the 
 
1 Certain portions of the published decision have been redacted for privacy considerations. 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Defense Department (DOD) on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline L 
(Outside Activities). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted 
or denied. 
 
On July 14 and 20, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
August 28, 2009. Applicant’s attorney entered his appearance on September 8, 2009. 
On September 9, 2009, I granted Applicant a delay to accommodate his attorney’s 
schedule, and allow additional time for Applicant to receive the investigative file, which 
apparently he requested on August 31, 2009.2 DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
November 3, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled on November 25, 2009. 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 15, which were admitted 
over Applicant’s objections.3 Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 
through 7. AE 1 - 6, were admitted without objection. AE 7 was received on December 
28, 2009, and admitted over the Government’s objections. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on December 9, 2009. The record was closed on December 28, 
2009. 
 
 
2 Defense Security Service (DSS) documents indicate Applicant submitted a Privacy Act request on 
October 2, 2009. DSS provided a response on October 9, 2009, and a supplemental response on 
November 25, 2009 (AE 7, Tab A). Applicant also received documents in response to a Freedom of 
Information Act request on February 24, 2009 (Tr. 66). On September 9, 2009, Applicant submitted a 
FOIA request to the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). That same month, OPM informed 
Applicant that it did not have any records under his name and identifying information (AE 5). 
 
3 In general, Applicant’s objections were based on: lack of relevance, lack of foundation and 
authentication, incomplete documents, hearsay, and that some documents contained private information 
(Tr. 36-66). After weighing Applicant’s objections, I admitted all the documents in an effort to develop a 
full and complete record. I considered Applicant’s objections in deciding what weight, if any, to give to the 
evidence in light of the record as a whole.  
 
    I admitted and considered GE 8 with its two enclosures. The document is a business record prepared, 
transmitted, and kept in the regular practice of government agencies adjudicating security clearances and 
protecting classified information. The document was not prepared “with a view towards litigation.” In direct 
examination - before the document was admitted as evidence - Applicant’s attorney made reference to 
and asked questions based on information favorable to Applicant contained in GE 8 and its enclosures. 
(Applicant assisted law enforcement on a large U.S. passport fraud investigation and relayed other 
valuable information (Tr. 195-196)). Most of the information in GE 8 is consistent with government 
exhibits, Applicant’s testimony, and his hearing and post-hearing exhibits. In direct and during cross-
examination, Applicant denied and clarified the contents of GE 8 that he believed were not accurate.  
 
3 
 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
At Applicants’ request, and with the Government’s acquiescence, I conducted a 
joint hearing. The same attorney represented both Applicant and his spouse (ISCR 
Case No. 08-06925). 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to Egypt. The request and the attached documents were marked and included 
in the record as Government Exhibit (GE) 16 for identification. Applicant objected to my 
consideration of GE 16. The documents were not admitted, but were considered for 
administrative notice purposes only. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted and denied, in part, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 3.c. He admitted SOR ¶¶ 
3.a, 3.b, 3.f, 3.k - 3.m, and 4.c, with explanations. He denied all remaining allegations. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of 
the evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old Arabic linguist employed by a defense contractor. He 
was born, raised, and educated in the Arab Republic of Egypt (Egypt), where he 
received a law degree and a police science and law enforcement administration degree. 
He is licensed to practice law in Egypt, but he never practiced law in Egypt. He worked 
for the Egyptian government from 1974 until 1984. In 1974, at age 24, he was 
commissioned as a police officer (special agent) in one of the Egyptian ministries. In 
1979, he travelled to a North American country as a member of an Egyptian delegation 
to a non-alignment conference. He testified he was only a bodyguard for an important 
Egyptian dignitary.  
 
Applicant was promoted through the ranks and became a senior level officer with 
supervisory duties (equivalent to a colonel). He was in charge of a section conducting 
state security investigations, anti-terrorism, and counter-intelligence. He testified some 
of his training was taught by U.S. personnel. Applicant was promoted to a general 
director position working with armament and operations. In that capacity, he supervised 
and handled security operations in government raids and supervised the security plans 
and operations for government institutions (Tr. 252-253, 269-272). While in these 
positions, Applicant possessed a high-level Egyptian security clearance (Tr. 254).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant claimed he no longer has any contact with the Egyptian 
government or with friends that worked with him in the security services of the Egyptian 
government (Tr. 193). He claimed that since immigrating, he only has had infrequent 
contact with Egyptian government personnel while they participated in training at a U.S. 
university. Approximately four times between 1996 and 2003, a U.S. university invited 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
Applicant to assist the university hosting Egyptian government personnel receiving 
training at the university (Tr. 252-255). Also, during his visits to Egypt, Applicant briefly 
met with some of his old Egyptian security service friends while passing through the 
airport.4 Applicant denied that he maintains contact with some of the key directors of the 
Egyptian security services,5 as indicated in GE 8. 
 
Applicant first travelled to the United States in 1979. He and his family stayed 
with his Egyptian-born uncle for approximately one year. His uncle is a 76-year-old 
professor at a U.S. university. Before immigrating to the United States, his uncle was a 
member of an Arab terrorist organization. He was granted asylum in 1963, became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, and has been living in the United States since. He has two U.S. 
born adult children: one is a professor at a U.S. university and the other a physician (Tr. 
105-106).  
 
Applicant knew of his uncle’s association with the terrorist organization since 
Applicant was a young man (Tr. 193). He disclosed his uncle’s affiliation during a 
background interview (Tr. 193). To Applicant’s knowledge, his uncle is no longer 
associated with any terrorist organizations.6 At his hearing, Applicant claimed he no 
longer affiliates with his uncle. Applicant’s wife testified she and Applicant now hate his 
uncle because he is a womanizer and left his wife. Applicant and his wife testified they 
have never been involved in politics or associated with any terrorist organizations. 
 
Applicant married his wife in 1977 in Egypt; they immigrated to the United States 
in 1984. Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens in 1993. They have 
three adult children who are citizens and residents of the United States. Two of the 
children were born in Egypt and became naturalized U.S. citizens in 1994. The third 
child was born in the United States. Applicant’s wife was a homemaker from 1977 until 
2007. In May 2007, she started working as an Arabic linguist with a government 
contractor. 
 
Applicant’s parents are deceased. He has three siblings, two brothers and one 
sister who are citizens and residents of Egypt (Answers to the SOR). His sister was a 
professor at an Egyptian university. She is now a homemaker. She is married to an 
Egyptian who is the chief engineer for a large U.S. corporation doing business in Egypt. 
Because of his job, they are planning to move to the United States in the near future. 
 
4 On his three security clearance applications (answers to questions about his foreign activities and 
contacts with a foreign government), Applicant indicated that from 1992 to present (2006), he “met with 
previous colleagues while visiting or in official training in the US. While visiting Egypt on some occasions 
he met with colleagues who work in governmental positions. The nature of the communications is that 
“with old friends. This is not a contact with a government or in any government capacity.” (GEs 2, 5, and 
7) 
 
5 Applicant’s testimony is contrary to his 2005 summarized background interview (GE 8). The agent 
recorded that Applicant was maintaining contact with “key directors within the Egyptian security services.” 
 
6 Applicant’s testimony is inconsistent with his 2005 summarized background interview (GE 8). 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Applicant testified that he is not close to his siblings and has infrequent contact with 
them. His contacts are limited to infrequent telephone calls and email exchanges during 
holidays or special occasions. He averred that his siblings are pro-American and have 
never been involved with politics or worked for the Egyptian government. One of his 
brothers worked as the .7 The other was 
the “former  in Egypt. As of 
November 2004, he was the partner and director of an international relations company 
(AE 4). Applicant had a third brother who was killed by sniper fire while in a  
. At the time, he was 
the ” (AE 4). 
 
Applicant’s aunt, one of his wife’s sisters and her husband, and one of their three 
children are citizens and residents of Egypt. His aunt lives in an Egyptian apartment 
rented by Applicant since 1996. He testified his aunt pays for the rent – approximately 
$8 monthly. He denied providing any financial support for his aunt. He explained that 
she is old, sick, and has no children. He rented the apartment for her because she was 
afraid that being an old woman, she would be evicted unless she has the protection of a 
man.8  
 
In his 2003 and 2004 security clearance applications, Applicant was asked to 
disclose whether he had any foreign property, business connections, or financial 
interests. He failed to disclose that he was renting an apartment in Egypt. Although he 
was leasing the apartment, he did not consider it to be his property or his financial 
interest in Egypt, because he was leasing the apartment for his elderly aunt. Emails 
between Applicant and company personnel assisting him with completion of his 2003 
application show he disclosed the apartment on his emails. 
 
Applicant’s wife has three sisters. Sister 1 is a citizen and resident of Egypt. His 
wife is very close to Sister 1. Prior to 2006, they had personal contact every year or 
every two years. Since 2006, they have telephone contact approximately twice a month 
(Tr. 123-124). Sister 1 has three children; two of them are U.S. citizens. The third child 
is applying for a green card. Sister 1 and her husband have not worked for the Egyptian 
government and have not been involved in politics, or associated with organizations 
adverse to the United States. Her husband owns a construction company which he is 
selling to immigrate to the United States. Applicant’s wife applied for Sister 1’s U.S. 
residency in November 1996, and it has been approved. The whole family is 
immigrating to the United States in the near future. Her other two sisters are naturalized 
U.S. citizens and residents.  
 
 
7 Applicant’s November 2004 email indicates his brother was the  
 Egypt” (AE 4). 
 
8 Applicant’s testimony appears to be contrary to his 2005 summarized background interview (GE 8). 
During the interview he stated that he and his wife were renting an apartment in Egypt. 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
Applicant’s wife and her siblings inherited a home and three acres of land in 
Egypt when their father died in 1999. She claimed she sold her interest in the home to 
one of her sisters. The land has been in her family since the 1800s, and they have title 
to the land. She and her sisters share a 2/3 interest in the land. She claimed they have 
not been able to sell it because over 17 of her relatives live on it. She claimed the land 
is still in his father’s name. She intends to renounce her interest in the land. She 
presented no documentary evidence to support her claims or to establish the value of 
the land and home she inherited.9 
 
Applicant’s wife travelled to Egypt with her children in 1997, 1999, 2000, 2002, 
and 2003. She took her children sightseeing in Egypt and to visit with relatives. While in 
Egypt, they stayed with her sister. Applicant accompanied them in one of the trips, but 
she cannot recall which trip (Tr. 133). She repeatedly stated she considers the United 
States her country and reaffirmed her loyalty to the United States. The United States is 
the country where she and her husband chose to live and raise their children. Her family 
never worked for the Egyptian government. She testified her family in Egypt is 
composed of mostly wealthy investors, who never had a need to work for the 
government (Tr. 135).  
 
In his 2003 and 2004 security clearance applications, Applicant was asked to 
disclose all foreign countries he had visited during the seven years preceding his 
applications. He disclosed he travelled to Egypt in December 1994. However, he failed 
to disclose that he travelled to Egypt on three other occasions: in April 2000, to visit his 
mother who was terminally ill; in August 2000, to bury his mother; and in May 2002, to 
renounce his mother’s inheritance.10 His last visit to Egypt was in 2007, for personal 
medical reasons. He denied any of these visits were business related (Tr. 192).  
 
Applicant testified his failure to disclose his travels to Egypt was not intentional, 
and that he never intended to falsify his application or mislead the government. He had 
problems with the electronic security clearance application program. The file was 
corrupted, his disclosed information did not print, and the program did not allow him to 
correct his entries (Tr. 182, 246). Applicant’s 2003-2004 emails with company personnel 
assisting him completing his applications show he was having some problems 
completing them. Notwithstanding, the emails also show he was specifically asked 
about his travel to Egypt after 1994. In his response, Applicant commented on his 1994 
trip, but failed to provide any information about his 2000 and 2002 trips to Egypt. 
Applicant deliberately omitted his travel to Egypt in 2000 and 2002.11 He provided the 
omitted travel information to a background investigator during a follow-up interview, as 
 
9 This remains a concern in light of her testimony that her family in Egypt is composed of mostly wealthy 
investors who never had a need to work for the government (Tr. 135). 
 
10 In a 2005 background interview, Applicant indicated he was in the process of inheriting around 
$50,000-$60,000 from his mother’s estate (GE 8). Applicant provided no documentary evidence to show 
he renounced his mother’s estate. 
 
11 See AE 4, emails dated October 27, 2004, at 7:57 PM; and November 3, 2004, at 5:51 PM. 
 
7 
 
 
well as a copy of his passport reflecting his omitted travel. He averred these actions 
show he had no intention to hide or mislead the government. 
 
Applicant was admitted to the practice of law in a U.S. state in 1992. Shortly 
thereafter, he established his own law firm and practiced law until 2003. While practicing 
law in the United States, Applicant advertised he was licensed to practice law in Egypt, 
that his law firm was dedicated to the practice of law in Egypt, and that he was certified 
by the Egyptian government as an international arbitrator (Tr. 200, GEs 9 and 12). At 
his hearing, Applicant denied he ever practiced law in Egypt. He claimed he only 
provided advice and translated documents (Tr. 210). During cross examination, he 
stated he stopped representing clients in Egypt in 2004 (Tr. 267). On December 12, 
1994, Applicant travelled to Egypt to represent a U.S. client in a monetary claim (AE 4). 
 
In his answers to the SOR, Applicant denied that from approximately 1996-1998 
to 2003, he had business interests with or provided legal advice to his former law 
professor (HA), and to his brother-in-law (AE), both citizens and residents of Egypt. In 
his answers to question 12 of his 2003, 2004, and 2006 security clearance applications 
(asking whether he had any foreign property, business connections, of financial 
interests), Applicant disclosed that from 1998 to present he had a legal business 
cooperation agreement with his former law professor, and that he had a “corresponding 
office, telephone, and fax” with his brother-in-law. He further disclosed that from 2001 to 
present, he was certified by the Egyptian government as an international arbitrator. 
However, he never had a client in his capacity as international arbitrator (Tr. 205). 
 
Applicant testified he and his law professor are only acquaintances, and that they 
have not talked to each other since 2005, when Applicant moved to his current state of 
residence. Applicant met the professor as a law student and had contact with him while 
living in Egypt. He had no contact with the law professor from 1984 until 1994. In 1994, 
Applicant travelled to Egypt to represent a U.S. client, and he met with the professor. 
Thereafter, they had contact approximately every two years. He provided legal advice to 
his law professor in 1996-1997. Later during the hearing, he qualified his testimony 
saying that they only “spoke about legal issues” (Tr. 201). 
 
Applicant represented his nephew and his brother-in-law in a wrongful damages 
lawsuit on behalf of his nephew. His nephew was born in the United States. Because of 
his nephew’s lack of legal capacity, his brother-in-law signed the representation 
documents and managed the lawsuit on behalf of his son (Tr. 204). 
 
In his answers to question 13 of his 2003, 2004, and 2006 security clearance 
applications (asking whether he had ever been employed by, or acted as a consultant 
for a foreign government, firm, or agency), Applicant disclosed that from 1992 to present 
he provided free consultation to Egyptian consulate personnel in the United States 
concerning U.S. legal matters. He also provided comments for publication on 
international legal issues to a Middle Eastern country newspaper. In his answer to the 
SOR and at his hearing, Applicant stated he never provided legal advice to the Egyptian 
consulate itself. He only advised Egyptian consulate personnel on their personal legal 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
issues. He represented an Egyptian embassy attaché in a lawsuit, other embassy 
personnel on contract litigation, and provided consultation on domestic matters. He 
stopped providing legal advice to Egyptian consulate personnel in January 2005 (Tr. 
206, 265). He denied having a long-time association with a woman assigned to an 
Egyptian consulate in the United States.  
 
In the mid-1990s, Applicant was involved in two complex class action litigation 
cases in two different federal courts. As a result of his repeated professional misconduct 
in the handling of the two cases, he was sanctioned over six times for violating court 
orders, filing frivolous actions, and lying to the court. His sanctions exceeded $40,000, 
and he was disqualified from the practice of law in a federal court.  
 
In May 1999, Applicant’s state professional disciplinary board filed formal 
charges against him for his violation of numerous rules of professional conduct in the 
litigation of the two above mentioned cases (GE 3). The substantiated behavior 
included: lack of competence, misleading the courts with non-meritorious claims and 
contentions, lack of candor toward the tribunal (made false statements under oath), 
obstructing litigation, conduct intended to disrupt a tribunal, and conduct prejudicial to 
the administration of justice. In September 2004, Applicant’s state disciplinary board 
sanctioned him and suspended him from the practice of law for three years (one year of 
the suspension was deferred) (GE 4). In January 2005, Applicant’s state Supreme Court 
affirmed the disciplinary board’s decision. At his hearing, Applicant admitted he was 
sanctioned both by the federal courts and by his state Supreme Court, but repeatedly 
denied any wrongdoing. He claimed there were other attorneys that were sanctioned, 
but he was singled out with the harshest punishment. 
 
In sanctioning Applicant, the state disciplinary board noted he had no prior 
disciplinary record, was inexperienced in the practice of law, provided full disclosure to 
the board, cooperated in the proceedings, and demonstrated remorse. It also favorably 
commented on his good character, reputation, and Applicant’s significant contribution to 
the profession in the form of his pro bono work. 
 
Applicant did not disclose the above-mentioned attorney disciplinary proceedings 
in his answers to question 40 of his November 2004 and June 2006 security clearance 
applications (asking whether in the last seven years he had been a party to any public 
record civil court actions not listed elsewhere in the form) (emphasis added). Applicant 
explained he did not disclose the disciplinary proceedings and sanctions because: the 
process did not become a “public record” until the appeal process was completed and 
he did not receive the Supreme Court decision until February 2005;12 he was not a 
party on a civil action; and the sanctions proceedings took place in an administrative 
 
12 Applicant’s excuse is disingenuous considering that upon the filing of formal charges against him in 
May 1999, the disciplinary proceedings (including the charges, numerous hearings, the decision, and the 
appeal) became public. Rule XIX of the [state] Supreme Court Rules, Section 16 B.  
 
 
9 
 
 
                                           
forum, not in a “civil court.”13 The attorney disciplinary proceedings took place in an 
administrative forum, not in a “civil court.” Thus, Applicant was not required to disclose 
the attorney disciplinary proceedings against him in response to question 40 of his 
security clearance applications. 
 
In November 2003, a $45,877 federal tax lien was filed by the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) against Applicant and his spouse for unpaid federal taxes for calendar 
years 1993, 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, and 2001. Final notices of intent to levy and 
enforcement action were issued on December 31, 2002, for tax year 1993; on February 
15, 2003, for tax years 1994, 1995 1999, 2000, and 2001; and on March 17, 2006, for 
tax year 2002. For tax year 1993, Applicant’s 1997 and 1998 tax returns were offset on 
March 8, 2004, to pay part of his debt. For tax year 1994, Applicant made three $500 
partial payments in August, September, and October 2006 (AE 7, Tab C, Tax Payer 
Advocate Service letter to Applicant and his spouse, dated May 30, 2008, with 
enclosure). He paid his IRS tax debt and the federal tax lien was released on June 3, 
2009 (AE 6). 
 
Question 36 of his 2003 and 2004 security clearance applications asked him to 
disclose whether in the last seven years he had a lien placed against him for failing to 
pay taxes or other debts. In both applications, Applicant disclosed a $225 state tax lien 
which was later resolved. The November 2003 federal tax lien was filed after Applicant’s 
submission of his January 2003 security clearance application. Thus, he had no 
knowledge of the tax lien before submitting his application. 
 
Applicant repeatedly claimed he was not aware of the federal tax lien when he 
submitted his November 2004 security clearance application. His testimony is not 
credible. He initially testified he found about the tax lien in April 2004. He later changed 
his testimony and claimed he found about the tax lien in late 2004 (Tr. 175). Applicant 
knew or should have known he was indebted to the IRS for his unpaid federal taxes for 
calendar years 1993, 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, and 2001. IRS final notices of intent to 
levy and enforcement action were issued on December 31, 2002 and on February 15, 
2003. Applicant’s IRS documents show Applicant was mailed the notices to his then 
home address. Applicant’s 1997 and 1998 tax returns were offset to partially pay his 
IRS debt for tax year 1993, on March 8, 2004. Applicant must have known about the 
offset of his tax returns before he submitted his November 2004 security clearance 
application. Applicant knew of his federal tax debt and the federal tax lien and he 
deliberately failed to disclose it when he submitted his November 2004 security 
clearance application.  
 
Questions 38 and 39 of Applicant’s January 2003, November 2004, and June 
2006 security clearance applications asked him to disclose whether in the last seven 
 
13 In 2003 emails to company personnel assisting him to complete his security clearance application, 
Applicant disclosed he had been a defendant on two civil actions, but indicated the cases were dismissed 
(Tr. 221; AE 4). He had omitted that information on his 2003 security clearance application.  
 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
years he had been over 180 days delinquent on any debts, and whether he was 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt. When he submitted both his 2003, 2004, 
and 2006 security clearance applications, Applicant knew he was indebted to the IRS 
for unpaid federal taxes for years 1993, 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, and 2001. He 
deliberately failed to disclose these debts on all three Applications.14 
 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that Applicant is indebted to a bank for $3,882, with a 
delinquent account number 3206. Applicant denied this allegation. His documents show 
he has been disputing account number 3206 since November 2006. Applicant’s records 
show he had another credit account with the same bank (number 6326 for $7,397), 
which became delinquent in 2002, and was charged off in Mary 2007. In December 
2008, Applicant settled this account for $1,331, and paid it (AE 7, Tab D). Applicant 
believes account 3206 is a fraudulent account and the bank has failed to provide him 
with evidence to show it is his account. Except for the two mentioned bank accounts 
and Applicant’s IRS and state tax liens, his 2007 and 2009 credit reports (CBR) show 
Applicant has a clean financial record with no other delinquencies indicated.15 
 
In 2001-2002, Applicant started working as an Arabic linguist. He was deployed 
in 2003 to a Middle East country in support of a U.S. agency. Commensurate with his 
duties, he was granted a top secret security clearance in early 2004, which was latter 
withdrawn. There is no evidence that Applicant compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. His performance as a linguist has been outstanding. 
He is considered to be an asset to his organization. He has been commended for his 
strong analytical skills, leadership, deep historical knowledge, and ability to work in 
diverse teams. He has established a reputation for being conscientious in the handling 
of classified information. He is also considered to be a credible and honest person.  
 
Applicant is a proud and loyal U.S. citizen. He considers the United States his 
country. He has always supported the U.S. Government, and expressed his gratitude 
for the benefits he and his family have received and enjoyed in the United States. There 
is no evidence to show that he has ever done anything to threaten the security of the 
United States. He has lived in the United States half of his life and all of his immediate 
family are U.S. citizens.  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts:  
 
Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world. It is a republic with a 
developing economy and has a strong executive. Egypt is an important and strategic partner 
 
14 The SOR did not allege that Applicant failed to disclose these debts under Guideline F or E. As such, 
this information cannot be used to deny Applicant’s security clearance. Notwithstanding, I may consider 
any behavior not alleged in the SOR to: assess his credibility; evaluate his evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; assess his possible rehabilitation; determine the applicability of the 
AGs; and conduct the whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
15 GEs 14 and 15. The 2009 CBR (GE 15) shows a $361 delinquent medical account, however, it 
provides no information to identify the creditor. This debt was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
11 
 
 
                                           
of the United States. The United States and Egypt enjoy a vibrant and friendly relationship 
based on shared mutual interest in Middle East peace and stability, strengthening trade 
relations, and promoting regional security. Egypt played a key role during the 1990-1991 
Gulf crisis, and the United States and Egypt participate in combined military exercises. The 
Egyptian government receives substantial U.S. foreign aid.  
 
Despite governmental action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Egypt 
remains high. Over the years, Egypt has suffered from numerous terrorist attacks. Major 
terrorist attacks where foreigners (including Americans) have been killed have occurred 
most recently in 2005, 2006, 2008, and 2009. Terrorists in Egypt target U.S. interests to 
exploit and undermine U.S. national security interests. Terrorist groups conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as state intelligence services. In addition to terrorism, extremist 
activities in certain areas of Egypt have created instability and public disorder. 
 
The State Department notes that Egypt's human rights record is poor and serious 
abuses continue in many areas. Problems include: limitations on the right of citizens to 
change their government; torture; arbitrary arrest; prolonged detention; poor conditions in 
prisons; executive branch limits on an independent judiciary; political prisoners and 
detainees; and restrictions on freedom of press, assembly, association, religion, and Internet 
freedom. Torture occurs in Egyptian detention centers. Government corruption and lack of 
transparency persist. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. They provide 
explanations for each guideline and list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s goal is to achieve a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. (AG ¶ 2(c)) 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”16 Once the 
 
16 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case 
 
12 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government.17 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
In the mid-1990s, Applicant engaged in serious professional misconduct, 
including: violating court orders, misleading the court, filing frivolous actions, and lying 
to the courts. He was severely sanctioned for his misconduct.  
 
Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on his November 2004 security 
clearance application when he failed to disclose that in November 2003, the IRS filed a 
$45,877 federal tax lien against him and his wife for their failure to pay sufficient federal 
 
No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
13 
 
 
taxes for tax years 1993, 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, and 2001. He also failed to disclose 
his debt to the IRS on his security clearance application. I do not find his statement at 
the hearing about his lack of knowledge of the IRS lien to be credible. Applicant’s 
security clearance applications show he lived in his then residence from 1993 until 
2005. The federal tax lien was filed in November 2003, and it correctly reflects 
Applicant’s then residence address. More likely than not, Applicant received the notice 
of the federal tax lien. 
 
Applicant’s IRS documents show that he was mailed the final notices of intent to 
levy and enforcement action issued on December 31, 2002 and on February 15, 2003. 
On March 8, 2004, Applicant’s 1997 and 1998 tax returns were offset to partially pay his 
IRS debt for tax year 1993. It is probable that Applicant received notice of the IRS 
collection action, the notices of intent to levy and enforcement action, and the offset of 
his tax returns before he submitted his November 2004 security clearance application. 
 
I also find that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on his November 
2004 security clearance application when he failed to disclose he travelled to Egypt 
twice in 2000 and once in 2002. Applicant’s claims of inadvertent omission are not 
credible. Emails between him and company personnel assisting him with completion of 
his application show he was specifically asked about his travels to Egypt after 1994. He 
failed to list his travel in his applications, and he also failed to disclose his travel in his 
answer to those emails. Applicant deliberately falsified his November 2004 security 
clearance application. 
 
Applicant was not required to disclose his federal court and state Supreme Court 
sanction proceedings against him (charges, hearings, and decisions) because these 
proceedings are not “public record civil court actions.” The disciplinary proceedings, 
although public after the filing of formal charges, are administrative in nature. I also find 
that his failure to disclose that he leased an apartment in Egypt was not deliberate. 
Emails between Applicant and company personnel assisting him with completion of his 
application show he disclosed the apartment in those emails.  
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole - including his education, 
professional experience, maturity, and demeanor and testimony - I do not find his 
explanations for his failure to disclose the omitted information about his tax debts and 
his more recent trips to Egypt to be credible. Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his 
federal tax lien and his travel to Egypt on his security clearance application most likely 
because he was concerned about the negative impact his tax delinquencies and travel 
would have on his eligibility for a security clearance. His serious professional 
misconduct (violating court orders, misleading the court, filing frivolous actions, and 
lying to the courts) demonstrate questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
His behavior triggers the applicability of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 16(a): 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
 
14 
 
 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits of status, determine 
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;” and 
AG ¶ 16(e) “personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community 
standing.”  
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none fully apply. 
Applicant falsified his security clearance applications. His falsifications are serious 
offenses (felony-level), they are relatively recent, and they cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. Moreover, I find Applicant minimized his questionable 
 
15 
 
 
behavior at his hearing. There is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation, counseling, or of 
steps taken to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation or duress. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
In November 2003, the IRS filed a $45,877 federal tax lien against Applicant and 
his spouse for unpaid federal taxes for calendar years 1993, 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, 
and 2001. Their 1997 and 1998 tax returns were offset on March 8, 2004, and applied 
to their debt. Applicant started making $500 installment payments on their federal tax 
debt in 2006. He paid off his tax debt in 2009 and the lien was released. SOR ¶ 2.b 
alleges that Applicant is indebted to a bank for $3,882, for a delinquent credit account. 
He denied this allegation. He started disputing the account in November 2006, and it is 
still unresolved.  
 
The IRS lien and the delinquent debt trigger the applicability of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
16 
 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant started negotiating with the IRS in 2006, and his tax debt has been 
paid. He also started disputing the delinquent bank account in 2006. His evidence 
shows he may have a reasonable basis for his dispute. He should have been more 
aggressive in his efforts to resolve his financial problems. Except for the delinquent 
bank account and Applicant’s IRS tax debt and lien, his 2007 and 2009 credit reports 
(CBR) show he has a clean financial record with no other delinquencies indicated. He 
appears to be living within his financial means, and to have no financial problems.  
 
 Applicant has learned his lesson and should be able to avoid similar financial 
problems in the future. I find AG ¶¶ 20(d) and (e) apply. The remaining possible security 
concerns still raised by his financial behavior are being fully addressed, and are better 
considered, under the personal conduct guideline. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the Government’s concern is stated in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
 
17 
 
 
                                           
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign own or foreign operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.18  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection or obligation 
with his siblings, aunt, through his spouse with his in-laws who are citizens and 
residents of Egypt. The closeness of the relationship is shown by Applicant’s telephone 
and email contacts with them, directly or through his wife, his leasing of an apartment 
for his aunt, and his and his wife’s travel to Egypt to visit their family.  
 
Applicant was a member of the Egyptian security forces. He has long-time 
friends, business partners or associates in Egypt, some of whom are or were members 
of the Egyptian security services. He continued his association with the Egyptian 
government when he provided legal advice to Egyptian embassy personnel in the 
United States, and by meeting with Egyptian government personnel attending training in 
the United States. His comments for publication on international legal issues to a Middle 
Eastern country newspaper likely brought him to the attention of Egyptian government 
officials, and possibly terrorist organizations. His brothers are or were high level officials 
of the Egyptian government. His contacts create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that Egyptian agents, or 
terrorists operating in Egypt, may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified 
U.S. information. 
 
Applicant’s business interests in Egypt related primarily to his law firm. He is no 
longer practicing law and does not intend to do so in the future. I consider his Egyptian 
business interests, compared to his business interests in the United States, not 
significant enough to raise a security concern.  
 
  The threat of terrorism in Egypt is high. Over the years, Egypt has suffered from 
numerous terrorist attacks. Terrorists in Egypt target U.S. interests to exploit and undermine 
U.S. national security interests. They conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state 
intelligence services. There is also the possibility that terrorists, extremists, or criminal 
organizations may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified U.S. 
information. 
 
 
18 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
18 
 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the Government. 
 
  Six Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I conclude that none of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. Applicant did not establish that it is unlikely he will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of his relatives and his in-laws and 
the U.S. interests.  
 
In light of the sometimes difficult relationship between Egypt and the United 
States and the high threat of terrorism in Egypt, Applicant’s close relationship with his 
relatives and friends create a risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion by the Egyptian government or terrorist organizations operating in Egypt. His 
 
19 
 
 
contact and close relationship with his relatives could potentially force him to choose 
between the United States and the interests of his relatives in Egypt. Available 
information sustains a conclusion that there is a risk that the Egyptian government, or 
terrorist organizations operating in Egypt, may attempt to exploit Applicant directly, or by 
exploiting Applicant’s relatives. Applicant’s situation creates a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s obligations to protect sensitive information and his desire 
or obligation to help himself, or help his family if a foreign interest were to attempt to 
exploit them. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant has a long-standing relationship 
and demonstrated loyalty to the United States. He and his family have lived in the 
United States during the last 26 years. By all accounts, they are patriotic Americans 
who consider the United States their country. There is no evidence that either Applicant 
or any member of his family has ever done anything against the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(f) 
partially applies because Applicant’s business is based in the United States, not in 
Egypt.  
 
Guideline L, Outside Activities 
 
 Under AG ¶ 36, the Government’s concern is that “[i]nvolvement in certain types 
of outside employment or activities is of security concern if it poses a conflict of interest 
with an individual's security responsibilities and could create an increased risk of 
unauthorized disclosure of classified information.” 
 
 AG ¶ 37 sets out two conditions that may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any employment or service, whether compensated or volunteer, with:  
 
 (1) the government of a foreign country;  
 
 (2) any foreign national, organization, or other entity;  
 
 (3) a representative of any foreign interest; 
 
(4) any foreign, domestic, or international organization or person 
engaged in analysis, discussion, or publication of material on 
intelligence, defense, foreign affairs, or protected technology; and  
 
(b) failure to report or fully disclose an outside activity when this is 
required.  
 
 Applicant has a long-standing relationship with the government of Egypt as a 
result of his important position with the Egyptian security forces prior to immigrating to 
the United States, his brothers’ work in important positions of the Egyptian government, 
his services to Middle Eastern country newspaper, and his pro bono legal services to 
Egyptian embassy personnel in the United States. Additionally, through the years, he 
 
20 
 
 
had sporadic business with one of his Egyptian law professors. I find Applicant’s 
contacts and behavior trigger the applicability of AG ¶¶ 37(a)(1), (2), and (3). 
 
 AG ¶ 38 outlines conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) evaluation of the outside employment or activity by the appropriate 
security or counterintelligence office indicates that it does not pose a 
conflict with an individual's security responsibilities or with the national 
security interests of the United States; and  
  
(b) the individual terminated the employment or discontinued the activity 
upon being notified that it was in conflict with his or her security 
responsibilities. 
 
Applicant has not practiced law since 2005, and he credibly testified he has no 
intention of practicing law again. He has not travelled to Egypt since 2007, he does not 
intend to work for the Middle East newspaper in the future, and has not hosted Egyptian 
government officials visiting the United States. The evidence supports a conclusion that 
Applicant has discontinued his activities of concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is well-educated man, and 
a good father and husband. He supported the war on terror working as an Arabic 
linguist and by deploying to a Middle East country in support of a U.S. agency. He was 
granted access to classified information for some time. There is no evidence that 
 
21 
 
 
Applicant compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. He 
established a reputation for being conscientious in the handling of classified information. 
His performance as a linguist has been outstanding. He is considered to be an asset to 
his organization. He has been commended for his strong analytical skills, leadership, 
deep historical knowledge, and ability to work in diverse teams. He is also considered to 
be a credible and honest person.  
 
Applicant is a proud and loyal U.S. citizen. He considers the United States his 
country. He has always supported the U.S. Government, and expressed his gratitude 
for the benefits he and his family has received and enjoy in the United States. There is 
no evidence to show that he has ever done anything to threaten the security of the 
United States. He has lived in the United States half of his life and his wife and children 
are loyal U.S. citizens.  
 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant’s behavior in federal courts, his 
deliberate falsification of his security clearance applications, and his contacts with 
relatives in Egypt, leave me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. “Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990).  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the personal conduct and foreign influence security concerns. He mitigated the 
financial and outside activities security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.e, 1.f:   Against Applicant 
     
 Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.d, 1g:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b:     For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 3, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
22 
 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a-3.h,    Against Applicant 
   3.j-3.m: 
 
Subparagraph 3.i:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline L:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 4.a-4.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
