 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-04556 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On November 8, 2007, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86). On September 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 17, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On January 22, 2010, DOHA assigned the case 
 
 
 
 
2
to me. On February 17, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for 
February 25, 2010. The case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. DOHA received the hearing transcript on March 9, 2010. The record remained 
open until March 15, 2010, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit information. She 
timely submitted four documents that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
D and admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel.                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.j.  
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and divorced. At the age of 18 years old, she enlisted in 
the U.S. Army. She honorably served from April 1993 until February 1998, when she 
was discharged as an E-4. She worked in the area of logistics. While in the Army, she 
married another soldier in February 1996. They divorced in June 2005. (GE 1.) They 
have a 14-year-old son, who lives with her. She held a Secret security clearance 
throughout her military career.  
 
 Applicant completed an associate’s degree in business management in the fall of 
2000. In October 2000, Applicant began working for federal contractors. In November 
2001, she started her current position as a senior technician logistics researcher with 
another federal contractor. In that position, she performs work support the U.S. troops. 
Her performance evaluations grade her as “excellent or outstanding.” (Tr. 19; AE B.)  
 
 After her divorce decree was entered in June 2005, Applicant’s husband ceased 
paying child support for six months. At the time, she was earning $15 per hour and 
could not pay the household expenses without the monthly child support payment of 
$660. As a result, she was unable to pay her mortgage or car loan and began 
accumulating debt. In November 2005, she filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy and paid all of 
her outstanding debts in November 2006. To-date, her former husband owes her 
$2,500 in child support arrears, but is paying current child support on a monthly basis. 
(Tr.  20-21.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports dated November 2008 and July 2009, the 
September 2009 SOR alleged that Applicant accumulated nine delinquent debts totaling 
$37,682, which include six federal student loans that total $28,600. The debts started to 
become delinquent after November 2006. The status of each of the debts is as follows: 
   
(1) Applicant disputed the dental debt alleged in ¶ 1.b for $571. She asserted that 
Tricare is responsible for the debt because she incurred it while married in 
early 2005. She testified that she will pay the debt if she cannot resolve it. (Tr. 
24-27.) According to AE C that she submitted on March 15, 2010, she will pay 
the debt on April 26, 2010, as she cannot locate her correspondence to 
Tricare because she is in the process of moving.    
 
 
 
 
3
 
(2) Applicant paid the $142 debt alleged in ¶ 1.c, owed to a daycare company for 
her godchild, who was staying with her for a period of time. (AE C; Tr. 27.)  
 
(3) Applicant makes monthly payments of $175 on the $8,362 debt owed for a 
2007 automobile repossession alleged ¶ 1.d. She claimed that warranty 
issues arose regarding the car, affecting its performance. She has made 
payments for the past eight months and has included the payment in her 
budget. (GE 3; Tr. 28; AE D.) The debt is being resolved. 
 
(4-9) In July 2008, Applicant began making monthly payments of about $600 
through a garnishment on the federal student loans alleged in ¶¶ 1.e for $1,308; 
¶ 1.f for $4,213; ¶ 1.g for $6,383; ¶ 1.h for $5,585; ¶ 1.i for $6,713,;and ¶ 1.j for 
$4,405. (AE A; Tr. 27-29.) In 2009, she paid a total of $8,540 on the loans. (Id.) 
By February 20, 2010, she paid another $1,588 on them.1 These debts are being 
resolved. 
 
 In summary, Applicant is addressing the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, the 
majority of which consists of student loans. To-date, she has paid at least $13,000 of 
the $28,600 federal student loan debt. She paid the $142 debt, is paying $175 a month 
on the automobile debt, and will pay the $541 Tricare bill at the end of April 2010. 
Applicant submitted her budget. Her net monthly income is $2,650 and includes a $750 
child support payment that she now receives.2 After paying her expenses, she has 
approximately $582 remaining at the end of each month. (AE D.) Recently, she helped 
pay her brother’s funeral expenses, which depleted her savings. (Tr. 30.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                            
1In 2009, Applicant also paid $5,072 toward her state student loans through a second 
garnishment. As of February 20, 2010, she has paid an additional $1,059 on those loans. These state 
loans were not alleged in the SOR. Hence, they are not considered for disqualifying purposes in this 
case, but will be considered under the Whole-Person Analysis.   
2 Twenty percent of Applicant’s salary is automatically deducted from her pay for the federal 
student loans, and ten percent is deducted to pay the state student loans. (Tr. 29.)  
 
 
 
 
 
4
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
 
 
 
 
5
disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise security concerns. Applicant has a history of accumulating delinquent debt 
that began in 2005 as a result of insufficient income. She resolved some of her debt 
through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy she filed in September 2005. However, she 
subsequently accumulated additional debts, in particular student loans, which she did 
not begin to address until 2008. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties, three of which may be applicable to this case: 
  
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant started 
accumulating debt after she and her former husband divorced in June 2005, when she 
earned a low hourly salary and did not receive child support for at least six months. 
Those circumstances were beyond of her control. By November 2006, she had 
responsibly resolved all of her outstanding debt through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Since 
then, she incurred additional debts and her student loans became past due. There is 
insufficient evidence to support the application of this mitigating condition to those 
debts, as there is no evidence of the presence of circumstances that were beyond her 
control after November 2006.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant did not present evidence that she 
obtained formal financial counseling; however, she submitted copies of pay stubs that 
document payments on her student loans, along with a paid receipt for one of the 
alleged debts, and her budget includes a monthly payment for an automobile loan. The 
documents indicate that her current financial obligations are under control. This 
mitigating condition has some application. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is partially applicable in this case. It provides mitigation when “an 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provided evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” Applicant testified that 
she consistently disputed the $571 dental debt because it should have been paid by 
Tricare. In her recent document submission, she stated that she will pay the bill at the 
end of April 2010, because she cannot find the earlier correspondence with Tricare that 
documents the dispute. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
6
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 34-year-old single 
mother, who honorably served her country for five years in the military. Since leaving 
the Army, she has been employed by federal contractors. In her last performance 
evaluation, her employer rated her as “excellent” in several categories.  
 
In November 2006, Applicant resolved debt that she accumulated as a 
consequence of her divorce through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Currently, student loans 
comprise the majority of her delinquent debt, along with an automobile loan. In 2008, 
she began repaying all of her student loans, albeit through garnishment proceedings. At 
this time, she has a good job that affords her the means to pay the debts and achieve 
financial stability. She has repaid about $13,000 of the federal student loans, $6,000 
toward the state student loans, and about $1,400 on the automobile debt. Given the 
progress she has made in resolving her debts, and an awareness of the potential 
employment problems that additional delinquencies could create, it is unlikely that 
similar security concerns will arise in the future.    
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
