KEYWORD: Guideline  F
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant’s debts originally grew out of circumstances
largely out of her control.  However, Applicant subsequently failed to act responsibly.   The
Judge’s includes a rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-03766.a1
DATE: 04/23/2010
DATE: April 23, 2010
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-03766
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
 Willey E. Shelton, Personal Representative
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
2
clearance.  On August 19, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 19, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Edward W.
Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following findings: Applicant’s finances were in order before she
married her third husband.  Applicant’s third husband was an alcoholic who spent time in prison,
could not keep a job, and spent foolishly when he did have money.  When Applicant filed for divorce
in 2002, her husband promised he would pay part of the marital debts, but he never did.  Applicant
was then responsible for all of the marital liabilities and several of the debts became delinquent.
Applicant accumulated a total of $13,631 of delinquent debt and she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy
in July 2009.  Applicant’s payment plan was confirmed and she made the first four payments.
The Judge concluded that, although the circumstances that initially resulted in Applicant’s
debt problems were largely out of her control, Applicant subsequently failed to act responsibly under
the circumstances.  The Judge pointed out that Applicant has been divorced for more than seven
years and has had steady employment since 1991.  The Judge concluded that sufficient time has
elapsed for Applicant to adjust to her financial situation and to take steps to remedy the problem.
The Judge concluded that Applicant only began addressing her finances in earnest after they became
an issue for her security clearance.  The Judge also noted that Applicant’s more recent problems with
overdrafts and with delinquent taxes are not related to her ex-husband.   The Judge concluded that,
although Applicant has received financial counseling as part of her bankruptcy and has made the first
four monthly payments as required, there are not clear indications that her financial problems are
being resolved or are under control.  The Judge also concluded that the four payments made to the
bankruptcy trustee were not sufficient to qualify as a good-faith effort to pay or resolve debts.
Applicant asserts that the Judge did not take into consideration the continuing impact of her
divorce on her financial profile in the years since 2002, failed to take into account numerous debts
that Applicant paid off after the divorce, and wrongly concluded that Applicant had no plans to pay
off a judgment against her.  Applicant’s arguments do not establish error.           
Applicant points to nothing specific in her argument about the inordinate effect her divorce
had on her finances during the seven years since it was finalized, other than to say she still had to
maintain a household.  The Board has reviewed the Judge’s decision and is satisfied that he
adequately addressed the impact that Applicant’s husband’s lifestyle and the subsequent divorce had
upon her finances.  The Judge noted that Applicant’s financial difficulties were initiated in large part
by circumstances beyond her control.  The Judge concluded, however, that Applicant had not been
diligent in resolving her debt delinquencies in recent years.  The Board finds reasonable support for
3
this conclusion in the record.  Regarding paid off debts, the Judge specifically mentions the fact that
Applicant retired some debts in the years after her divorce.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant
had no plan to address the judgment against her until she applied for a security clearance and her
finances became an issue is supported by substantial evidence.   
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007). 
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He discussed the applicability of the mitigating factors listed under Guideline
F, but indicated with considerable detail why those mitigating conditions could not be invoked in
this case to alleviate the government’s security concerns.   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett           
4
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
