 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 11-09757 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) in an 
undated document. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a July 15, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for the 
sole debt referenced in the SOR, regarding past-due federal taxes amounting to about 
$19,060, which he asserts is related to a tax balance owed from a joint marital tax filing 
from 2003. (Answer to the SOR) He also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2013. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 16, 2013, setting 
 
2 
 
 
the hearing for November 5, 2013. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government moved to amend the SOR with two additional allegations, regarding tax 
liens entered against Applicant in early 2003. Applicant did not object to the 
amendment, but denied knowledge of the allegations. The Government then offered 
Exhibits (GX) 1-11. They were accepted without objection. Applicant offered testimony 
and Exhibits (AX) A-C. The transcript of the proceeding was received on November 13, 
2013. The record was then closed.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old research administrator who has worked for his current 
employer for 21 years. He has a bachelor’s degree in chemistry and a master’s degree 
in a related field. He has been married for over three decades and has four adult 
children. Applicant’s wife is self-employed. He and his wife divide their monthly 
expenses, with Applicant primarily responsible for making their mortgage payments. (Tr. 
32) They have maintained separate bank accounts since the 1990s.  The couple does 
not discuss Applicant’s wife income. (Tr. 50-52) Applicant’s wife did not reveal the full 
extent of their tax debt to Applicant until three days before the hearing. (Tr. 52-53, 73) 
 
 Until 2002, Applicant and his wife had always filed their tax returns jointly. (Tr. 21, 
24) His wife routinely collects their Internal Revenue Service (IRS) W-2 forms, then 
compiles their records for their tax preparer. Up to that time, Applicant’s only tax issue 
was a tax debt created at some time around 1998. It appears to have resulted in two tax 
liens, in January 2003 and April 2003. They are noted in the amended SOR as being for 
$28,256 and $66,322, respectively. (Amendment to the SOR). The actual tax year of 
their creation is unclear. (Tr. 65) When Applicant later learned that these figures were at 
issue, he believed them to be erroneous. (Tr. 75-76) It appears some of Applicant’s 
subsequent tax refunds were applied toward these liens. (Tr. 48-50, 62-63, 67) It is 
unclear whether the liens were ever satisfied in this manner. In 2010 or 2011, Applicant 
changed his withholding so that he no longer had a refund due that could be applied to 
any outstanding balances. (Tr. 61, 65-66) Applicant genuinely has little knowledge of 
the couple’s tax situation. (Tr. 66) 
 
In 2002, Applicant and his wife filed their tax returns separately. (Ex. AX C) In 
2003, Applicant suspected that his wife had some business-related financial issues. (Tr. 
22) Applicant’s wife does not discuss her business with Applicant; he makes no 
inquiries regarding her business. When he suspected there was a tax issue in 2003, he 
“wanted to clear [himself] from her tax debts and keep that separate….” (Tr. 23) He 
knew that his employer regularly withheld the appropriate amount for his tax obligations 
based on his salary, which generally left him with a modest refund. However, he 
complied when his wife requested that the two file jointly that year. The amount of 
money withheld by his employer for his personal income was reflected on their tax filing 
($5,271) and noted under the line for the couple’s total tax payments made. After that 
line item, the return showed the couple owed an additional sum of $11,456 plus a 
penalty. (Amendment to the SOR, attachment) There is no evidence this sum was 
timely paid.  
 
3 
 
 
Subsequently, after the couple resumed filing separately, Applicant’s wife did not 
timely file his individual tax returns for 2005, 2006, and 2007. This problem was not 
rectified until 2007. (Tr. 45) Applicant is unaware of what led to this delay. Applicant has 
filed separately since 2003. 
 
Unbeknownst to Applicant, joining his wife in filing for tax year 2003 eventually 
led to a tax debt of over $60,000 being noted on his credit report. He believes his wife 
was simply too embarrassed at the time to disclose to him her tax and financial 
situation. (Tr. 24) He believes he first became aware that a debt was existent after he 
completed a 2006 security clearance application. (Tr. 26, 38) At one point in about 
2007, Applicant believed the debt balance was about $20,000. (Tr. 27) The sum was 
too great for him to satisfy in order to clear his financial record for purposes of 
maintaining a security clearance. He tried unsuccessfully to discuss the matter with his 
wife on multiple occasions. (Tr. 38-39) Applicant consulted a tax counselor, but was 
informed there was little the counselor could do without input from Applicant’s wife 
regarding what the issues were. Applicant tried to seek help from the IRS by phone in 
2007, but it was unproductive for similar reasons. He then started “keeping track of the 
credit reports and looking at those. And [he] became aware that there was some kind of 
debt . . . for state and federal. And [his wife] told [him] that she cleared it up. There’s no 
state [debt] now. I didn’t know what to believe. And quite frankly, I thought those [2003 
lien] entries [on] the credit report were wrong.” (Tr. 26)  
 
From 2007 until July 2013, Applicant did nothing to address the debt, preferring 
to leave “it in [his wife’s] hands.” (Tr. 55) He did so as a matter of trust. Nearly five years 
passed before any documented efforts were exerted by the couple to address their 
delinquent debt. In 2012, Applicant’s wife started working with the IRS on their financial 
issues and in 2013, Applicant applied for, but was denied a loan to cover the debt due 
to insufficient collateral. (Tr. 35) He concedes this was his “first attempt . . . to try to 
resolve the delinquent tax obligation.” (Tr. 36) He attributed his limited action, in part, to 
“never really [knowing] what the true tax debt was. And even . . . when [he] tried this 
summer, [he] did not know.” (Tr. 36) He was unaware that the debt had reached up to 
about $74,000. A second loan attempt was also said to have been rebuffed. (Tr. 55) 
Applicant’s wife only recently began discussing the tax debt situation with Applicant a 
few days before the hearing. (Tr. 52-53) Applicant stated: “[U]ntil recently, I didn’t know 
the true . . . amount of debt and how much she had paid on it. I don’t know what the 
balances are that she owes. [What] I do know is that she’s told me . . . she’s working 
with some attorney to try to work the tax debt out.” (Tr. 25).  
 
Correspondence from the IRS to Applicant’s wife shows a $74,307.50 federal tax 
debt as of February 9, 2012. In March 2012, she entered into a repayment plan under 
which she would pay the IRS $700 a month until the balance is satisfied. This balance 
appears to be for taxes owed between 2002 and 2012. (Tr. 72) That same 
correspondence shows that she has paid $1,000 a month from August 28, 2012, 
through April 28, 2013. (AX B) Additional documentation (AX A) shows those $1,000 
payments continued to at least October 2013. The documentation is addressed solely to 
Applicant’s wife. With regard to the joint 2003 IRS debt, Applicant denies that he owes 
 
4 
 
 
taxes for the year at issue, noting that his regular withholding by his long-term employer 
satisfied his own tax obligation for the year. However, he understands that when he filed 
jointly, he became jointly responsible for his wife’s tax obligation, which he views as a 
“household debt” for which he is “responsible for . . . at least indirectly.” (Tr. 33-34)    
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling because he feels “reasonably 
confident with [his] own finances . . . .” (Tr. 67) Rather, he believes that his wife is “the 
one who needs the counseling.” (Tr. 67) However, he concedes that he and his wife will 
jointly need to “take care” of their financial problems if his wife cannot adequately 
address them. (Tr. 69-70) He concluded by stating: 
 
I wasn’t really completely clear on how much tax that there was until 
Thursday night of last week. I have no documentation to support, 
nothing to give me an idea. So for me to go after and try to resolve that 
tax debt, I need more information. . . . I have not been negligent in 
trying to resolve this tax debt because I have not simply been aware. 
And yes, I’ve been ignorant about the amount of it and the extent of it, 
yes. And you could fault me for not trying to go around and get that 
information from other sources. . . . But . . . for me to go out and get a 
loan to resolve her, the debt which we collectively own, but she has an 
awareness of, and she does not participate with me in getting  this . . . . 
(Tr. 73-74. Compare Tr. 52-53, Applicant stated that he learned the 
amount of taxes at issue three nights before the hearing)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
5 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
significant federal tax debt. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant incurred debts in the 1990s and in 2003 which became delinquent. The 
circumstances regarding how these tax liabilities were created remain unclear. He 
seems to attribute them primarily to his wife’s business, of which he knows little and 
regarding which he and his wife do not discuss related financial matters. Despite his 
lack of knowledge about his wife’s business, and his sense in 2003 that it might have 
financial issues, he filed his federal tax returns jointly with his wife that year. When he 
discovered they may have incurred a tax liability that was noted on his credit report, his 
efforts to address the issue were less than diligent. Rather, he continued to rely on his 
wife and marital trust to rectify the situation. What, if anything, Applicant’s wife did to 
resolve their joint tax issues between 2003 and 2011 is unclear. In 2012, it appears she 
entered into a tax repayment plan covering tax issues from 2002 to 2012. Related 
documentary evidence, however, fails to identify whether her efforts subsume 
Applicant’s tax liability, satisfy any tax balance he may have from his 1990s-era debt, or 
break down the debt owed in such a way to demonstrate that the tax liability reflected in 
the Government’s documents regarding Applicant are being addressed.  
 
 Moreover, Applicant has not received financial counseling. This is because he 
feels competent to handle his own finances. However, he continues to leave much of 
the control of the family finances to his wife, who he specifically states is in need of such 
counseling. Finally, although Applicant testified that at one point he thought the amount 
of debt noted was erroneous, there is no documentary evidence he has attempted to 
formally dispute any of the balances alleged. Given these considerations, I find that 
none of the mitigating conditions available apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
 
7 
 
 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old research administrator who has worked for his current 
employer for 21 years. He has an advanced degree in science. He has been married for 
over 30 years and raised four adult children. Applicant’s wife is self-employed and does 
not discuss her business or finances with Applicant; she also compiles their respective 
tax files for professional preparation. He leaves tax issues to his wife. Consequently, 
Applicant knows little about their financial issues. Three days before the hearing, she 
told him what their tax situation was and provided him with evidence that she had 
entered into a debt repayment plan with the IRS in 2012. Given Applicant’s own 
comments, her explanation was less than thorough and left Applicant at a disadvantage 
at the hearing. 
 
Repeatedly, Applicant stated that he deferred to his wife with regards to their 
taxes and relied on her to resolve any related issues as a matter of trust. Trust is 
essential in a marriage. However, candor amongst spouses with regard to issues such 
as finances is equally essential when one or both of the spouses maintain a security 
clearance. One’s financial situation is a significant issue in these matters, as Applicant 
surely knew when he received the SOR, if not before.  
 
Here, Applicant presented his case handicapped by his lack of knowledge 
regarding both his own, and his household’s, finances. While Applicant stresses that his 
lack of knowledge about the debt at issue is based not on negligence, but ignorance, 
the distinction is moot. Much like his continued reliance on his wife to handle family 
finances and tax preparation, especially in light of his own testimony that she is in need 
of financial counseling, it raises a basic question of judgment. Under the AG, evidence 
indicating a lack of judgment can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Given current dynamics in 
Applicant’s household regarding finances and his less than diligent efforts to address 
the debt at issue, such questions were legitimately raised and remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
