KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant lacked credibility was consistent with the
record that was before her. Adverse Decision Affirmed.
CASENO: 11-06649.a1
DATE: 02/21/2014
DATE: February 21, 2014
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-06649
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 11, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of
2
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On November 29, 2013, after
conducting a hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Rita
C. O’Brien denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s
decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has a bachelor’s degree.  She has worked for her current employer, a Federal
contractor, since 2002.  She has held a security clearance since that year, and, since 2005, she has
held a top secret clearance.  
In 2000 Applicant was arrested and charged with three misdemeanor counts of destruction
of private property.  Her boyfriend accused her of damaging his car during an argument with him.
The police responded, taking Applicant to the police station, charging her, and releasing her with
a court date.  At the hearing, she stated that she was aware of these charges and that they had all
been dismissed.  
In 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with destruction of property, a felony.  During
her clearance interview, she stated that she had had an argument with her boyfriend, during which
she damaged his screen door.  Applicant was arrested and subsequently released.  In her response
to the SOR, Applicant stated that the charge was based upon her boyfriend’s claim that she had
keyed his car.  
In the court hearing resulting from the 2002 incident, Applicant was represented by an
attorney.  In her response to the SOR, she stated that her attorney had told her that the charge was
being reduced to a misdemeanor.  During her clearance interview, she stated that the charge had
been dismissed.  She testified that she did not know that the 2002 charge was a felony.  She stated
that she did not realize this until completing a job application.  
When she completed her security clearance application (SCA) in 2010, she answered “no”
to the following question: “Have you EVER been charged with any felony offense?”  At the hearing,
she stated that she had not been aware that the 2002 offense was a felony.  
In completing DOHA interrogatories in 2013, Applicant certified that the investigator’s
summary of her interview was correct.  During the interview, she denied having been arrested on
a felony charge or for any offense, regardless of the severity.  When confronted with the 2002 arrest,
Applicant stated that she had not listed it because she was uncertain about the time frame required
by the question.  In addition, she did not disclose her 2000 arrest to the investigator.  At the hearing,
she testified that she did not remember whether she had disclosed the 2000 arrest or not.  She also
testified that she did not admit the 2002 arrest because she did not know it was a felony.  When
1See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15: “The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
3
cross-examined about her contention that she had been uncertain as to the time-frame, Applicant
again stated that she thought all of her charges were misdemeanors.  She testified that, because the
charges were dismissed, she believed that she did not have to report them.  
The Judge’s Analysis
In evaluating whether Applicant’s omissions were deliberate, the Judge stated that the SCA
question at issue was straightforward and that the word “EVER” was written in capital letters,
distinguishing it from questions that were time-limited.  She stated that Applicant had failed to
disclose either of these arrests during her clearance interview, admitting the 2002 incident only when
the investigator  confronted her with it.  She did not disclose the 2000 incident at all during her
interview.  The Judge also cited to Applicant’s inconsistent statements about her reasons for not
disclosing the felony.  She found that Applicant’s knowledge that this incident had been reduced to
a misdemeanor was a reason to believe that she had been aware that it had originally been a felony.
She concluded that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate.
In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge stated that she could not conclude
that the security-significant conduct will not recur, because Applicant continued to give conflicting
testimony at the hearing after having failed to be forthcoming in her SCA.  In the whole-person
analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s good work record.  She stated, however, that it was not
credible that Applicant would not have understood a simply-worded question.  She stated that
Applicant’s having concealed her arrests during the interview undermined her credibility.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that her omissions were deliberate.
However, the Judge made appropriate findings concerning the circumstances of the omissions at
issue here, particularly regarding the clarity of the questions and Applicant’s inconsistent statements.
The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant lacked credibility was consistent with the record that was
before her.  See ISCR Case No. 11-00541 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 5, 2012) (The Appeal Board gives
deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations).  The Judge’s findings about the deliberate nature
of the omissions reflect a reasonable interpretation of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 10-03732 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 14, 2013).
Applicant cites to record evidence such as her having held a clearance for many years
without incident.  This was evidence that the Judge was required to consider, along with all the other
evidence in the record.  The Judge made findings about Applicant’s circumstances, including matters
favorable to Applicant such as her good work record and that she has held a clearance since 2002.
Given the importance of candor during a clearance investigation, however, the Judge’s treatment
of the evidence is sustainable.1  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered
candid answers during the security clearance process . . .”  (emphasis added)  This language places an applicant’s
truthfulness and candor during the processing of his or her SCA at the heart of Guideline E.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
08-07575 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 8, 2010).  
4
all of the evidence in the record, nor has she demonstrated that the Judge’s decision contravened the
weight of that evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01977 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 30, 2012).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.        
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
