 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11375 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has recently 
made some payments on the 17 charged-off or collection accounts alleged in the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). However, her payments are insufficient in number and 
magnitude to resolve the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 23, 2013, 
the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On August 19, 2013 and August 22, 
2013, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
November 13, 2013. The FORM contained 12 attachments. On December 4, 2013, 
Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of her opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
On December 26, 2013, Applicant responded to the FORM and included 
documentation as to certain debts. Department Counsel did not object to the material, 
which was admitted into the record. On January 15, 2014, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted all of the factual allegations in 
the SOR, and her admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old integration technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since 2009, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 10) In August 
2010, her security clearance eligibility was denied due to her criminal background and 
her credit. Her mother has cancer and periodically Applicant has missed work to take 
care of her. (Item 10) 
 
 Applicant was questioned about her finances during personal subject interviews 
in April 2009 (Item 11) and August 2012 (Item 10). In March 2012, she was also asked 
about her finances in written financial interrogatories. In March 2012, her personal 
financial statement indicated her monthly net remainder (monthly income less monthly 
expenses and monthly debt payment) was approximately $900. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant has experienced financial problems since at least 2007, when the debt 
listed in SOR 1.l went to collection. In February 2007, she wrote three checks to a 
grocery store, was arrested and charged with the misdemeanor of writing worthless 
checks. (Item 10, 11) The charge was later nolle prossed. (Item 10) In September 1992, 
she was charged with fraud for writing a check with insufficient funds in the bank. (Item 
10) In 2003 or 2004, she wrongfully obtained unemployment compensation while having 
a job. (Item 10, 11) In 2007, she was charged with theft of property third degree for her 
action. (Item 10) She was required to pay $1,693 in restitution and placed on probation 
for three years. She entered into a repayment plan with the state to pay $50 monthly 
and made her payments until 2009, when she was unemployed for two weeks. (Item 10) 
In February 2011, the restitution was complete and her probation ended in March 2012. 
(Item 5, 10) 
 
 
3 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct is not considered for its security significance under 
the criminal conduct guideline, but as the conduct provides information as to her past 
financial problems.  
 
 In September 2010, Applicant purchased a 2002 Ford vehicle for her daughter at 
a cost of $11,406. (Item 6, 10) After making payments for two years, she was unable to 
continue making the payments2 and told the lender to come and get the car. (Item 6, 10) 
Once repossessed, the car was sold, and the creditor informed her she owed additional 
money ($8,171) on the debt. (Item 10) She admitted owing the debt, but disputed the 
amount owed. (Item 3) There are two accounts with the collection agency. The 
deficiency balance owed on the repossessed car has been waived. (FORM Answer) 
She also owed $535.70 on a vehicle repair contract with the same creditor. (Item 3) She 
provided documentation showing a $50 payment in October and another in December 
2013. (FORM Answer)  
 
 Applicant was unemployed for two weeks in 2009, before she obtained her 
current job. She took control of three of her friend’s children. In August 2012, she 
referred to two of the children as her “God-children” who resided with her and for whom 
she provided financial support. (Item 10) During her April 2009 personal subject 
interview (PSI), she asserted her debts were tied to her obtaining custody of the three 
children who were not on her insurance and due to the children’s medical bills. (Item 11) 
She asserts she now has insurance for the children and provided documentation 
showing dental insurance cards for two of the three children. (Item 3) 
 
 The SOR lists nine medical debts (SOR 1.a through 1.i: $232, $81, $50, $25, 
$186, $340, $187, $41, and $200), now in collection, which totaled $1,342. As of August 
2013, she had contacted the collection firm and was attempting to establish a 
repayment plan. The collection firm was collecting on ten accounts totaling $2,773. 
Applicant made a $50 payment on September 19, 2013, a $50 payment on October 18, 
2013, and a $100 payment on November 4, 2013. (Item 12) As of December 26, 2014, 
she had made no additional payments on these debts. (FORM Answer) 
 
 Some of the SOR debts were discussed during her March 2009 PSI. (Item 11) In 
her August 2012 PSI, each of the SOR debts was discussed. She stated she would be 
contacting the creditors and was attempting to establish repayment arrangements on 
the debts. (Item 10) 
 
 Applicant owed a lending company $330 for a charged-off account (SOR 1.p). 
She made a $70 payment on this debt in September, 2013, and a $50 payment in 
November, 2011. (FORM Answer) The balance due on this debt is $260. She asserted, 
but failed to document, that she had arranged with the creditor to make $70 monthly 
payments on this debt. However, the November payment was only $50, and she has 
not documented any additional payments on this debt. (Item 3, FORM Answer) 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal financial statement provided in April 2012 (Item 5) indicated she was making $200 
monthly payments with a balance due on the car of $8,370. 
 
4 
 Applicant has documented that she made 13 payments totaling $810 between 
August 2013 and December 2013. (FORM Answer) The debt in SOR 1.k was reduced 
by an additional $210, but no documentation as to this additional reduction was 
submitted. She made the following payments : in August three payments totaling $180; 
three payments in September totaling $190; three payments in October totaling $170; 
one payment in November totaling $100; and three payments in December totaling 
$170.  
 
A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Medical collection 
debt. 
$232 Three payments made. Between August 2013 
and November 2013, Applicant paid $200 on 
this debt and the following eight medical 
debts. (FORM Answer) 
b Medical collection 
debt. 
$81  
c Medical collection 
debt. 
$50  
d Medical collection 
debt. 
$25  
e Medical collection 
debt. 
$186  
f Medical collection 
debt. 
$340  
g Medical collection 
debt. 
$187  
h Medical collection 
debt. 
$41 Discussed during the March 2009 PSI. (Item 
11)  
i Medical collection 
debt. 
$200  
j Collection account for 
debt incurred in June 
2010. 
$1,807 Unpaid. Applicant asserts she made several 
attempts to contact the creditor. (FORM 
Answer) Creditor has not returned her calls. 
She hopes to establish a repayment 
arrangement for this debt.  
k Collection account for 
a school debt. Debt 
was discussed during 
the March 2009 PSI. 
(Item 11) 
$1,405 Paying. Applicant provided documents 
showing $70 payments in September, 
October, and December. (Item 3, 12, FORM 
Answer) Additionally the balance due was 
reduced from $1,264 in September 2013 to 
$843 by December 2013. (FORM Answer)  
 
5 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
l Collection account for 
a wireless company 
debt incurred in 
September 2007.  
$40 
 
Paid in August 2013. (Item 3, FORM Answer) 
The debt was discussed during the March 
2009 PSI, but paid four and a half years later. 
(Item 11) 
m Credit card account 
charged off in 
December 2010. 
$441 
 
Unpaid. Applicant is attempting to contact the 
debtor. (Item 3) 
n Loan account charged 
off in June 2013.  
Discussed during the 
March 2009 PSI. (Item 
11)  
$454 
 
Single payment made. In August 2013, she 
made a $70 payment. (FORM Answer) 
Applicant asserted, but provided no 
documentation, that she arranged with debtor 
to make $65 monthly payments on this debt. 
(Item 3) 
o Automobile 
repossession.  
$8,171 
 
 
The deficiency balance owed on the 2002 
Ford vehicle has been waived. (FORM 
Answer) 
Applicant owed $535.70 on a vehicle repair 
contract with this creditor. (Item 3) She made 
a $50 payment in October and another in 
December 2013. (FORM Answer) 
p Lending company 
charged-off account. 
$330 
 
Applicant paid $70 in September 2013 and 
$50 in December 2013. (FORM Answer) The 
balance due is $260. She asserted, but failed 
to document, that she had arranged with the 
creditor to make $70 monthly payments on 
this debt or that she has made any payments 
since September 2013. (Item 3) 
q Account charged off in 
December 2008.  
Discussed during the 
March 2009 personal-
subject interview. 
(Item 11)  
$490 Single payment made. In August 2013, 
Applicant made a $70 payment. (FORM 
Answer) She asserted, but failed to document, 
that she had arranged with the creditor to 
make $70 monthly payments on this debt. 
(Item 3) 
r Account charged off in 
December 2008.  
$490 Duplicate listing. The creditor reports list a 
single debt owed to this creditor. (Items 6,7, 8) 
 Total debt listed in 
SOR 
$14,480  
 
 
6 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant’s history of delinquent 
debt is documented in her credit report, her interviews by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, her SOR response, her response to interrogatories, 
and her FORM response. Applicant owed approximately $14,500 on 17 charged-off, 
collection, and past-due accounts. Some of the delinquent accounts were incurred 
starting in 2007, discussed as early as her March 2009 PSI, and remain unpaid. The 
evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
8 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In 2003 or 2004, Applicant was unemployed. In 2009, she was unemployed for 
two weeks just prior to her obtaining her current employment. Her multiple delinquent 
debts and financial problems are continuing in nature. Her handling of her finances, 
under the circumstances, casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
  AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. The financial problems started in 2007, but the 17 
debts remain unpaid. She has numerous debts and, because they remain unpaid, they 
are considered recent. There is nothing in the record supporting that conditions under 
which the debts were incurred were unusual. Applicant has been asked about these 
obligations starting in April 2009. Given sufficient opportunity to address her financial 
delinquencies, Applicant has failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. 
Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) has limited application. Applicant’s mother has cancer and Applicant 
has missed worked to take care of her mother. Additionally, Applicant obtained custody 
of three children. These are factors beyond her control. Now that she has custody of the 
children she has been able to obtain insurance for them. Nine of the SOR debts, totaling 
approximately $1,300, are for medical expenses.3 Applicant has paid $200, in three 
payments, on these nine debts. With only three payments, it is too soon to find it is likely 
that Applicant will continue to make payments on these debts. She failed to show the 
financial impact of her mother’s cancer on her ability to pay her debts.  
 
In March 2012, Applicant’s net monthly income was $900. She is no longer 
making $200 monthly car payments, which would increase her net monthly income to 
$1,100. The record does not contain a more current personal financial statement.  
 
                                                          
3 The record does not indicate if Applicant or the children received the medical treatment.  
 
9 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no showing 
Applicant has received financial counseling. Additionally, there is no clear showing that 
many of her financial obligations are being addressed.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to the majority of the 
SOR debt. She made more than a single payment on only four of the debts. To date, 
Applicant’s efforts to address her delinquent accounts have been minimal. There is no 
documentary evidence to support her assertions that she contacted two creditors (SOR 
1.j and m) and tried to arrange repayment plans. She paid a $40 debt (SOR 1.l), and 
made at least three payments on the school debt (SOR 1.k), I find for her as to these 
two debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant has failed to show more than a minimal number of payments on a few 
of her SOR debts. Her attempts at repayment followed her receiving the SOR. The 
concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish that she has paid 
off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for her to demonstrate 
she has established a plan to resolve her delinquent debt and has taken significant 
action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s 
financial situation and her actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible 
and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment 
 
10 
on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
There is insufficient evidence of sufficient payments on Applicant’s delinquent 
debts. On three of the debts (SOR 1.j, m, and o4) she made no payment. In August 
2013, she paid the $40 debt (SOR 1.l) that she incurred in 2007 and has been 
questioned about since 2009. She made a single payment each on two other SOR 
debts (SOR 1.n and q.). She has made two payments on the debt listed in SOR 1.p and 
made three or more payments on her medical debts (SOR 1.a – i) and on the school 
debts (SOR 1.k). It is too soon to determine that she will continue making her payments.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her 
circumstances, articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. She 
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide sufficient documentation 
regarding her past efforts to address her delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information the financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Her mother has cancer and she has missed work to take 
care of her. Additionally, she has custody of three children. After a lengthy period of 
inaction, during which she did not address her past delinquent accounts, even though 
repeatedly asked about her debts, she has initiated some effort to address her debts. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Applicant would like to pay her delinquent debt, 
but her history of actual payment on her debts is very limited.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but it is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. In the future, if Applicant continues with her payments on her delinquent 
obligations, establishes compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially 
addresses her past-due obligations, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
her security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not supported by the 
evidence she presented. 
 
 
  
 
                                                          
4 Creditor has waived the $8,171 deficiency balance on the repossessed vehicle. (FORM Answer) 
 
11 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E 3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k and l:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m – q:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
