 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11814 
  ) 
  )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, criminal conduct, and Guideline D, sexual behavior. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J and D. DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on July 27, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to a different 
administrative judge on September 14, 2013, and reassigned to me on December 11, 
2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 20, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 28, 
2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted into the 
record without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) A 
through D that were admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 6, 2014.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Upon motion by Department Counsel, I amended SOR allegation ¶ 1.a to change 
the language of the allegation from “you plead guilty” to “you pleaded not guilty, but 
were found guilty.” Applicant had no objection to this amendment. This amendment 
conforms the factual allegation to the evidence set forth in the record.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the underlying factual 
allegations, except for language in SOR ¶ 1.a, which stated that he “plead guilty to 
Aggravated Assault of a Minor Child.” The admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He worked for a defense contractor for about 15 years. 
He was married in 1987. He has three children. He has a high school diploma. He 
served about 10 years in the Air Force and was discharged with an honorable discharge 
at the pay grade of E-4. He held a security clearance while in the Air Force, apparently 
without incident.2   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) being found guilty of 
aggravated assault of a minor and indecency with a child by sexual contact, and (2) as 
a result of this conviction, he is required to register as a sexual offender for the rest of 
his life in the state where he resides. This conduct is alleged under Guideline J and 
Guideline D. 
  
 In late May 2004, friends of the Applicant’s had their 12-year old daughter (AB) 
stay overnight at the Applicant’s home. The friends had known Applicant for a number 
                                                          
1 Tr. 87-88. 
 
2 Tr. at 6-7, 55-56; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
of years and were in the Air Force together. Applicant was AB’s godfather and AB had 
stayed with his family on earlier occasions with her mother and father. AB’s parents 
were divorced, but there were ongoing custody issues at this time. AB reported to her 
mother that Applicant had touched her inappropriately in a sexual manner. AB’s father 
took her to the local police where she was interviewed and completed a written 
statement. She stated that while she was attempting to sleep the night at Applicant’s 
house, he came into her room and pulled up her shirt and touched her breasts. He also 
touched her buttocks, spread her legs, pulled her underwear to the side, and inserted 
his finger into vagina. She did not immediately tell anyone about the incident, but when 
her father was preparing to have her stay another night on June 2, 2004, she told her 
mother about the incident.3 
 
 An investigation ensued by the local authorities. Applicant provided a sworn 
affidavit denying any wrongdoing with AB. The case went before a grand jury which 
indicted Applicant on three counts in October 2007.4 Applicant maintained his 
innocence and pleaded not guilty to all the charges. The case went to trial before a jury 
in January 2011. He was convicted on all three counts and the jury sentenced him to 10 
years confinement, suspended, and 10 years supervised probation. He was also 
required to register in the sexual offender program in his state of residence. Additionally, 
his terms of probation required his participation in a sexual abuse treatment program. 
His probation period does not end until 2021. Applicant appealed his conviction to the 
state appeals court. That court issued an opinion in December 2011 upholding the 
conviction, although it dismissed count 2 because of double jeopardy. Applicant 
indicated that all other appeal attempts (state and federal) have been exhausted. 
Applicant still maintains his innocence despite his conviction and the appeals court 
ruling.5  
 
 Applicant testified that he is required to report to the local sheriff’s office every 
three months. Although his probation requirements included his participation in a sex 
abuse treatment program, upon advice from his probation officer, he stopped attending 
during the pendency of his appeal case. He did not resume participation once his 
appeals were exhausted. He has not received any psychological treatment. His last 
contact with his probation officer was about three years ago.6 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of a friend, his current supervisor, and his 
wife. His friend testified that he believed Applicant was a law abiding person and 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 70-71; GE 2, 6. 
 
4 The indictment was for the following counts (summarized): Count 1, penetration of the sexual organ of 
the victim by the Defendant’s finger; Count 2, sexual contact of the victim by touching her genitals with 
the intent to gratify sexual desires; Count 3, sexual contact of the victim by touching her breast with the 
intent to gratify sexual desires. See AE 8. 
 
5 Tr. at 72, 76; GE 8; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 73-74, 76. 
 
 
4 
 
 
someone who is helpful and caring. His supervisor testified for him at the criminal trial 
and still believes in his innocence. He called Applicant one of the finest men he has 
known. Applicant’s wife also believes in his innocence and testified to what a fine father 
he is to their three sons. He also introduced awards, appraisals, and his honorable 
discharge from his Air Force career.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 41, 43, 46-47, 49, 52, 54, 56; AE D. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(d) the individual is currently on probation. 
 
In January 2011, Applicant was found guilty by a jury of his peers of felony child 
sexual abuse offenses and sentenced to 10 years’ probation. He remains on probation 
until 2021. I find that both the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s acts of child sexual contact occurred in 2004, but his conviction did 
not occur until 2011. The nature of the criminal acts, against a 12-year old girl who was 
his goddaughter, and which occurred while he was placed in a position of trust by AB’s 
parents, casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Under these 
 
6 
 
 
circumstances, his actions are not sufficiently attenuated after considering his behavior 
in its totality. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. Although Applicant, his friends, and his wife 
believe in his innocence, a jury of his peers, after considering all the evidence, including 
testimony by AB, convicted him on all counts. An appeals court upheld that conviction. 
AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. Applicant remains on probation and is still considered a risk 
by the state where he resides. He has not taken the recognized first step towards 
rehabilitation which is to admit wrongdoing. He also has not participated in any sex 
offender treatment program. He is required to register annually as a sexual offender. 
Applicant produced insufficient evidence that his reliability, trustworthiness and 
judgment are not in question based upon the nature of his previous conduct. AG ¶ 32(d) 
does not apply. 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
I have considered all of the sexual behavior disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
13 and the following is potentially applicable: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 In 2004, Applicant engaged in indecent sexual contact with a child who trusted 
him and who was his goddaughter. He was arrested, convicted, sentenced, and had the 
conviction upheld on appeal in 2011 for his actions. The above listed disqualifying 
condition applies.   
I have considered all of the sexual behavior mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14 
and the following is potentially applicable: 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 Although Applicant’s criminal acts occurred 2011, his abuse of trust and his 
failure to admit wrongdoing in the face of his conviction cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 14(b) does not apply.  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s Air 
Force career and his supportive character evidence. He remains on probation until the 
year 2021. Applicant continues to deny wrongdoing and therefore has made little effort 
toward rehabilitation. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline J, 
criminal conduct, and Guideline D, sexual behavior. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph:  2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
