 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-15124 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement concerns as his last use of illegal drugs 
was over five years ago. However, he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his deliberate falsification of his security clearance application. He deliberately 
failed to disclose his past drug use. Applicant’s untruthfulness during the security 
clearance process continues to cast doubt on his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline H (Illegal Drug Involvement) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a 
hearing, and requested a decision on the written record. 
 
 On December 4, 2012, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the SOR, Answer, and Applicant’s 
 
2 
 
 
security clearance application (SCA). On January 17, 2013, Applicant mailed his 
response to the FORM (Response) to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals.  
 
 On January 16, 2014, the FORM and the Response were forwarded to the 
hearing office. On January 23, 2014, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, has been working for a federal contractor since September 2011. 
He has never been married and has no children. Between 2004 and 2008, he frequently 
used marijuana. From 2007 to 2008, he also used cocaine on a frequent basis. He 
purchased both drugs on multiple occasions. In 2008, he received treatment for his 
substance abuse. He was diagnosed by the treatment facility with alcohol and cannabis 
dependence. (SCA; Answer) 
 
In 2011, Applicant submitted a SCA in connection with his employment as a 
federal contractor. He was asked on the form if he had used illegal drugs in the past 
seven years. He answered “no.” (SCA at 32-33) Applicant admits he falsified his SCA. 
He lied because he was embarrassed to admit his past drug use. (Answer)  
 
Applicant states that he now realizes he made a mistake by falsifying his SCA. 
He claims that he was honest about his illegal drug involvement during his security 
clearance interview. He further claims his past “substance abuse” was due to his 
parent’s death, a breakup with a girlfriend, and family turmoil. He states that he is no 
longer involved with illegal drugs and does not associate with those involved with illegal 
drugs. (Response) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
 
3 
 
 
or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant also bears the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to establish his or her eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.1  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.2 
 
 Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
                                                          
1 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises 
regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations 
require administrative judges to make predictive judgments). See also, Kaplan v. Conyers, et al., 2013 
U.S. App. LEXIS 17278 at ** 23-24, 40-51 (Fed. Cir. Aug. 20, 2013) (federal courts will generally defer to 
such predictive judgments).  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s extensive drug involvement from 2004 to 2008 and diagnosis of 
cannabis dependence raises the above concern. The record evidence also establishes 
the following disqualifying conditions under the guideline: 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse;3  
 
AG ¶ 25(b): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug 
dependence.4  
 
 The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the drug 
involvement concern. The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the 
evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and  
 
AG ¶ 26(d):  satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s last involvement with illegal drugs was over five years ago. Such a 
lengthy period of abstinence satisfies his heavy burden of demonstrating that he will not 
use illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.5 Applicant mitigated the 
drug involvement security concerns. 
                                                          
3 The Directive defines “drug abuse” as the “illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manger that deviates from approved medical direction.” See AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
4 Although the record is silent as to whether a listed duly qualified professional diagnosed 
Applicant with cannabis dependence, such can be inferred from the admitted facts. At a minimum, a 
qualified professional from the treatment facility evaluated him with such a condition. See AG ¶25(e).  
 
5 Applicant’s lengthy period of abstinence also strongly suggests that he satisfactorily completed 
all the terms of the substance abuse treatment program. However, he did not submit any documentary 
 
5 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant admits that he intentionally falsified his SCA by failing to disclose his 
past drug involvement. His falsification directly implicates the above listed security 
concern and establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
 The guideline also sets forth several conditions that could potentially mitigate the 
personal conduct concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and only AG ¶ 
17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the fact,” warrants discussion. 
Applicant claims that he was honest during his background interview regarding his past 
drug involvement. However, he submitted no evidence to substantiate his claim. He 
failed to meet his burden to establish any of the available mitigating conditions.6 
Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his SCA continues to cast doubt on his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 I considered the favorable and extenuating factors in 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
evidence from the treatment facility or other duly qualified professional providing him with a favorable 
prognosis. AG ¶26(d) does not apply. 
 
6 Although the adverse information about Applicant’s past drug involvement likely came out 
during his background interview, I have no evidence upon which to find that he volunteered the 
information before being confronted by the investigator. It is just as likely that Applicant revealed the 
information only after being asked by the investigator about any potential past drug involvement. 
Applicant bore the burden of demonstrating the applicability of the mitigating condition and failed to do so. 
His decision to have his case decided on the written record left me unable to determine the credibility of 
his statement that he volunteered the adverse information. 
 
7 The adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
 
6 
 
 
this case, including that Applicant admitted his wrongdoing and now recognizes that he 
should have been upfront about his past drug use on his SCA. However, the security 
clearance process relies upon the honesty of all applicants and begins with the answers 
provided in the SCA. Applicant’s after-the-fact recognition that he should have been 
honest about his past drug use from the very beginning of the security clearance 
process is insufficient, at this point, to mitigate the serious security concerns raised by 
his dishonesty.8 His dishonesty continues to raise doubts about his eligibility for a 
security clearance and such doubts must be resolved in favor of national security. See 
AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 See generally, ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011) (falsifications ”strike at the 
very heart of the security clearance process.”) 
