 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01973 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 14, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 30, 2013, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on October 24, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
 
2 
 
 
November 18, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted an undated response to 
the FORM (Response). The case was assigned to me on January 15, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He is divorced from his first wife whom he pays 
monthly alimony. He also has two children from this marriage for whom he pays child 
support. He remarried in 2008. He has worked for his current employer, a defense 
contractor, since July 2008. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1999. He served on 
active duty in the Navy from 1987 to 2008 and retired with an honorable discharge. He 
has held a security clearance, without incident, since 1988.1  
  
 The SOR lists thirteen delinquent debts, including a foreclosure totaling about 
$46,000. The debts are listed in credit reports dated October 2011, and May 2013.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted from his retirement from the Navy in 
2008, causing him to earn less money at the time, and the financial consequences of 
his divorce. He was required to pay his ex-wife alimony, which is automatically deducted 
from his retirement pay, and child support. He became delinquent on his child support in 
January 2008, but resumed paying in August 2008 and is currently paying the support 
amount and arrearages. He was unable to pay the debts listed in the SOR for a long 
period of time because he did not have the capacity to do so. He recently borrowed 
from his retirement account (401k) and began paying the debts or setting up payment 
plans. He acknowledged that he was negligent in not contacting the creditors in a timely 
fashion, but he was unsure how to proceed because he was confused by which 
collection company to pay.3 
 
Status of Debts: 
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a: A collection account for a telecommunications debt in the amount of 
$398. Debt became delinquent in June 2012. Documentation shows six payments of 
$40 per month since June 2013. Current balance is $150. Debt is being resolved.4 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3-4. 
 
2 Items 1, 6-7. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Response; AE A (1-5), B (2, 14-21). 
 
 
3 
 
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b: A collection account for a utility debt in the amount of $542. Debt became 
delinquent in August 2011. Documentation shows account settled for $390.89 with a 
current balance of zero. Debt resolved.5 
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.c: A collection account for a credit card debt in the amount of $2,321. Debt 
became delinquent in August 2008. Documentation shows account settled for $1,703 in 
August 2013, with a current balance of zero. Debt resolved.6 
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.d: A collection account for a consumer debt in the amount of $938. Debt 
became delinquent in February 2009. Documentation shows account settled for $788 in 
July 2013, with a current balance of zero. Debt resolved.7 
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.e: A collection account for a consumer debt in the amount of $5,946. Debt 
became delinquent in December 2009. Documentation shows account settled for 
$4,378 in August 2013, with a current balance of zero. Debt resolved.8 
 
6. SOR ¶ 1.f: A collection account for a credit card debt in the amount of $626. Debt 
became delinquent in October 2009. Documentation shows account settled for $566 in 
August 2013. Debt resolved.9 
 
7. SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h: Collection accounts for student loan debts in the amount of 
$2,544 and $5,541. Debts became delinquent in July 2008. Documentation shows five 
payments of $80 per month since June 2013. Debts are being resolved.10 
 
8. SOR ¶ 1.i: Collection account for a student loan debt in the amount of $22,642. Debt 
became delinquent in June 2010. Documentation shows seven payments of $70 per 
month since June 2013. Debt is being resolved.11 
 
9. SOR ¶ 1.j: Mortgage account where property was foreclosed for delinquency. 
Guarantor (Department of Veterans Affairs) is paying a partial payment. Credit report 
shows a zero balance. Debt is unresolved.12 
 
                                                          
5 Response. 
 
6 Response. 
 
7 Response. 
 
8 Response. 
 
9 Response. 
 
10 Response. 
 
11 Response. 
 
12 Response. 
 
 
4 
 
 
10. SOR ¶ 1.k: Collection account for a home equity loan debt in the amount of $31,988 
with a past due balance of $1,471. Debt became delinquent in December 2008. 
Documentation shows four payments of $200 per month since August 2013. Debt is 
being resolved.13 
 
11. SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m: Delinquent Federal tax debts for tax years 2010, 2011, and 
2012, in the respective amounts of $6,392 (2010 and 2011) and $258 (2012). Debts 
became delinquent in April of the next tax year. Documentation shows Applicant 
entered into a payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and began making 
monthly payments of $85 beginning in June 2013. He has made four payments. 
Beginning in December 2013, his payments increase to $130 monthly. Debt is being 
resolved.14 
 
 Applicant contacted a credit counselor in August 2013. The counselor provided 
him with information and advice on how to negotiate payments and settlements for his 
delinquent debts.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
13 Response. 
 
14 Response. 
 
15 Response. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant’s debts are recent, but are resolved or being resolved through payment 
plans. It is unlikely that similar debts will recur given Applicant’s current income 
producing ability. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. Applicant 
provided evidence that his retirement from the Navy and divorce contributed to his 
financial problems. However, in order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, 
Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the circumstances. He 
readily admits that he was slow to react to his financial problems, but beginning in June 
2013, he took affirmative steps to resolve his debts by contacting his creditors and 
arranging settlements and establishing payment plans. This demonstrates responsible 
behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant presented evidence of financial 
counseling, and there is sufficient evidence to show that Applicant’s financial problems 
are being resolved. Although Applicant failed to make his mortgage payments which led 
to foreclosure, and he has not subsequently initiated any good-faith effort to resolve this 
debt, his status as a veteran allowed for its resolution without any further liability on his 
part. There is sufficient evidence that he is making a good-faith effort to resolve his 
other debts. I find both AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past military 
service, including his holding of a security clearance for over 20 years without incident, 
and his divorce’s effect on his finances. I also considered his good-faith attempts to 
resolve his debts and begin making payments to his creditors. Additionally, he has not 
incurred any new delinquent debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
