 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-01005 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kevin C. Ambler, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2009, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 21, 2012, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, 
and effective within DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 28, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. His answer was forwarded to the DOD CAF by his 
 
2 
 
 
counsel by cover letter dated February 1, 2013. Counsel’s cover letter and Applicant’s 
answer were received by the DOD CAF on February 4, 2013.  Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on March 27, 2013, and I received the case assignment on 
April 2, 2013.  
 
The case was conducted in four hearing sessions, the first two session days 
were held by video teleconference (VTC) on May 9, 2013 and May 14, 2013. The 
second two session days were held in person on August 1, 2013 and August 2, 2013. 
Four separate transcripts (Tr.) from each hearing day were prepared and have been 
marked Volumes (Vol.) I through IV, respectively.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 15. GE 1, 3, 6, 
and 12 were admitted without objection. However, Applicant objected to GE 2, 4, 5, 7, 
8, 11, 13, 14, and 15 and they were admitted over Applicant’s objection. (Tr. Vol. I, 36-
60, 65-72, 93-95; Vol. II, 7-17.) 
 
Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through AE HHH, which were 
received without objection. (Tr. Vol. I, 78, 80, 82-92; Vol. II, 17-18; Vol. III, 282-292.) 
Additionally, Applicant called four witnesses and testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the hearing transcripts for Volumes I through IV on May 17, 2013, June 3, 
2013, August 13, 2013, and August 14, 2013, respectively.   
 
Procedural and Preliminary Matters 
 
Department Counsel noted that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, a mortgage 
account for $68,767 that had gone into foreclosure in November 2007, had been 
settled and resolved. (Tr. Vol. I, 10-11; GE 5, GE 7, GE 8.) She further noted that the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, an unpaid mortgage account for $31,491, and 1.f, a 120 
days past-due mortgage account for $31,491, are the same debt. (Tr. Vol. I, 11; GE 7, 
GE 8.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.f, and denied the 
remaining allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g and 2.a through 2.d. His admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information  
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old old site coordinator, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since February 2002. He graduated from high school in June 1970. 
Applicant graduated from college in June 1975 with a bachelor of science degree in 
international affairs and history. Upon graduation, he was commissioned as a second 
lieutenant and honorably served 27 years as an Air Force fighter pilot until he retired 
from active duty in October 1997 as a lieutenant colonel. Applicant was awarded his 
 
3 
 
 
first security clearance in July 1971 and has successfully and continuously maintained 
a security clearance for the past 42 years to include clearances at the top secret level. 
(GE 1; Tr. Vol. II, 130-141, 255; Vol. III, Tr. 383; GE 15, AE BB.) 
 
Applicant was married during the timeframe of 1978 to 1990. That marriage 
ended by divorce. During that marriage, Applicant and his former spouse adopted a 
daughter, who is now an emancipated adult. Applicant had a short second marriage 
from 1994 to 1996 that also ended by divorce. (GE 1, GE 3.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR identified seven separate allegations under this security concern. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g.) As noted supra, the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d has been satisfied and the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are duplicates. 
 
 The SOR debts are divided into two categories. SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.g 
are medical or utility-related debts and the remaining SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f are real 
estate-related debts. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – Medical collection debt in the amount of $1,051. Applicant notified 
treating hospital that he had primary and secondary coverage at the time he was 
admitted. The hospital billed the primary insurer, but neglected to bill the secondary 
insurer. The hospital sent the balance of the bill to collections. Applicant contacted the 
hospital and successfully disputed the bill. He submitted documentation from the 
hospital dated May 22, 2013, showing a zero account balance. ACCOUNT 
RESOLVED. (Vol. III, Tr. 395-401, 471-480; AE B, AE V, AE W, AE BBB.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – Medical collection debt in the amount of $257. Applicant is 
unaware of the medical services provided for this bill, but surmises that a doctor 
performed a service while he was hospitalized. To avoid further issues regarding this 
debt, Applicant paid it. Applicant submitted documentation from the collection agency 
dated June 4, 2013, showing a zero balance. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (Vol. III, Tr. 
401-404, 481-484; AE FFF.) 
 
 Applicant enjoyed excellent health during his Air Force and post-Air Force 
career. In early 2009, he was diagnosed with prostate cancer and is currently in 
remission. While in the Air Force, Applicant was covered by the military health care 
system. Post-Air Force, his health care costs were met by employer-sponsored health 
care insurance as primary coverage and TRICARE1 as secondary coverage. Typically, 
                                                          
1
 TRICARE, formerly known as the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed 
Services (CHAMPUS), is a health care program of the United States Department of Defense Military 
Health System. TRICARE provides civilian health benefits for military personnel, military retirees, and 
their dependents, including some members of the Reserve Component. TRICARE is the civilian care 
component of the Military Health System, although historically it also included health care delivered in 
the military medical treatment facilities. On October 1, 2013, TMA disestablished and TRICARE 
responsibility was transferred to the Defense Health Agency (DHA) which was established on the same 
day. http://3n.wikipedia.org//wiki/Tricare  
 
4 
 
 
this combined coverage provided Applicant with 100% medical coverage. (Vol. III, Tr. 
381-387, 488-490; AE Z, AE AA – AE JJ.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – Cable bill company collection debt in the amount of $136. This 
company provided cable and internet service to Applicant’s former condominium 
residence. Applicant testified that the service is linked with the unit and the occupant is 
responsible for payment. Applicant and condominium management notified the cable 
company when Applicant moved out of his condominium in September 2010; 
however, the cable company continued to bill him. Even though Applicant believed 
that he did not owe the bill, he contacted the cable company in early 2011 and made a 
settlement offer, which they rejected. On May 31, 2013, Applicant sent the cable 
company a letter disputing this debt and requested that it be removed from his credit 
report. He also notified the credit bureau that this is a disputed debt. Applicant has an 
ongoing good-faith dispute with this creditor. ACCOUNT BEING RESOLVED.  (Vol. 
III, Tr. 403-408, 484-486, 490-491; AE GGG.) 
  
 The following three debts as well as several other non-alleged debts represent 
debts Applicant incurred following the real estate market crash last decade. Applicant 
called his financial advisor (FA) as a witness, who was a real estate broker for 8 ½ 
years and specialized in high-end properties. Applicant had invested in a beachfront 
luxury condominium development (CD) consisting of five towers built on U.S. 
Government leased land.  A substantial benefit purchasers or investors derived from 
investing in CD, at least initially, was a zero property tax liability. The county began 
charging the condominium owners property tax that resulted in lawsuits by owners and 
investors. While litigation was ongoing, the CD’s attorney counseled owners to ignore 
their property tax bills. In this regard, FA assisted Applicant and his clients with letters 
to their lender banks instructing them not to pay county property taxes while litigation 
was pending. (Vol. II, Tr. 141-152; Vol. III, Tr. 326-327.) 
 
 Contrary to Applicant’s instructions, his lender bank paid the county property 
taxes. At the time Applicant met FA he had already purchased four CD units from the 
developer. One was his personal residence and the other three were investment 
properties. Applicant sought FA’s counsel when his costs of maintaining four 
condominiums spiraled and became untenable. The condominium owners ultimately 
lost their lawsuit against the county in 2009. Applicant bought his personal residence 
in 2003 for $657,000 and by 2007; it had more than doubled with an appraised value 
of “between 1.5 and 1.6 (million dollars).”  However, in October 2008 the real estate 
market bubble “burst” and numerous owners to include Applicant were unable to 
afford their homes or investment properties. In October 2008, Applicant sought FA’s 
advice on an exit strategy because with his current cash flow, he could only keep his 
properties for “another two to three years” before he ran out of money. At the time 
Applicant approached FA in October 2008, he was current on all his payments. (Vol. 
II, Tr. 151-163, 185-189; Vol. III, Tr. 318-326, 340-351, 366-367; AE QQ, AE RR.) 
 
 FA advised Applicant that he had two options – continue making payments on 
his four properties until he ran out of money or attempt to sell them by short sale 
 
5 
 
 
following a “strategic default.” In FA’s opinion, a short sale was the preferred 
alternative versus an involuntary foreclosure. FA listed all four of Applicant’s properties 
and successfully sold all of them by short sale – the three investment condominiums in 
2009 and Applicant’s personal condominium in 2010. The advantages of short sale 
were to avoid foreclosure and to be relieved of any deficiency between the sales price 
and the amount owed on the mortgage, late charges, and interest. The lender bank 
issued Form 1099-Cs, Cancellation of Debt, to Applicant for all four properties. 
Applicant also provided HUD Settlement Statements for all four properties. After 
following FA’s advice, Applicant was able to “walk away from all four properties, over 
$3.3 million in mortgages, without having to owe the bank any additional funds.” FA 
testified that Applicant’s strategic defaults were very difficult for him, but doing so was 
based on his advice as the “best decision” he could have made under the 
circumstances.   (Vol. II, Tr. 163-178; Vol. III, Tr. 351-363, 515-519; AE M – AE T.)  
 
 During the course of providing financial advice to Applicant, FA became very 
familiar with Applicant’s budget and income stream. Applicant earned a substantial 
income between his military retirement, post-retirement employment, and investments 
and was fiscally responsible. When Applicant purchased his investment properties, he 
followed the advice of the condominium developer and lender bank about the 
soundness of the investment, which at the time, was a reasonable course of action. 
Numerous conservative buyers, to include FA himself, invested in the condominium 
development and lost money. FA added that he would have counseled Applicant to 
purchase the condominiums in 2003 based on what he knew at the time. FA stated 
that Applicant was “probably one of the most reluctant (sellers) to go through the short 
sale process” even though it was his only viable option. (Vol. II, Tr. 178-185, 189-191; 
Vol. III, Tr. 326-340, 378-380.) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.d – Mortgage foreclosure debt in the amount of $68,767. Applicant is 
unable to explain the origin of this debt. It apparently relates to one of his four 
properties discussed supra; however, as noted all of those properties were sold 
through short sale, sales contracts were prepared, and Form 1099s were issued. 
Applicant contacted the lender bank and they were unable to shed any light on that 
debt appearing on his credit report and advised they would contact the credit bureau 
for corrective action. The documentation that Applicant provided demonstrates that his 
four properties were sold through short sale and the accounts zeroed out. As noted 
under Procedural and Preliminary Matters, supra, Department Counsel noted that 
this debt was settled and resolved. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (Vol. III, Tr. 408-411, 
414-417, 491-512; GE 6, AE H, AE K.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e – Mortgage account debt in the amount of $31,491. The lender bank 
claims this is money owed for taxes they paid to the county assessor on Applicant’s 
condo. Before the lender bank incorrectly paid the county taxes, Applicant provided 
them with a court order dated June 6, 2005, issuing a stay on collection of real 
property taxes while the property tax lawsuit was pending. He also provided lender 
bank with a letter instructing them not to pay property taxes while the lawsuit was 
pending, discussed supra. Contrary to Applicant’s instruction, the lender bank paid the 
 
6 
 
 
county taxes and claimed Applicant owed them money paid for taxes. Applicant made 
numerous telephone calls to the mortgage company disputing this debt and eventually 
this debt was reported to the credit bureaus. Applicant discussed this debt with the 
OPM investigator during his background investigation. This debt was paid or resolved 
through the short sales process in 2010, discussed supra and it being reflected on 
Applicant’s credit report appears to be an error. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (Vol. III, Tr. 
342-351, 363-376; AE QQ, AE RR.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f – Mortgage account debt in the amount of $31,491. This is a 
duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.e, discussed supra in Procedural and Preliminary Matters. 
DUPLICATE DEBT – ACCOUNT RESOLVED. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g – Cable bill collection account in the amount of $207. After Applicant 
moved from his condominium, he lived for a short time in a rental property and 
established a cable company account that provided a “bundle” package. When he 
moved out of the property, he notified the cable company that he was terminating his 
account and was informed to return their equipment, which he did. The cable company 
claimed Applicant did not return their equipment and an ongoing dispute ensured. 
Applicant successfully prevailed and the cable company provided a letter dated May 
17, 2013, advising that the account was zeroed out with an apology for any 
inconvenience they may have caused. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (Vol. III, Tr. 412-414, 
512-515; AE DDD.) 
 
Applicant contests the notion that he lived beyond his means. Before he made 
his property investments, he “effectively (had) no other debts.” After careful research, 
his plan was to invest in property and recoup his gains to use towards his retirement, 
but “[i]t didn’t work out for me.” (Vol. III, Tr. 376-378.) Other than the debts discussed 
above, which have been resolved, there is no record evidence that Applicant is in 
arrears on any other debts. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR identified six separate allegations under this security concern. (SOR 
¶¶ 2.a through 2.f.)  
 
 The personal conduct allegations are divided into two categories. SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b allege falsification concerns that Applicant did not disclose January 1977 and 
December 2000 alcohol-related offenses as well as a November 2007 foreclosure, a 
$257 collection account, and a past-due mortgage account on his November 2009    
e-QIP. 
 
 With regard to the alcohol-related offenses, when Applicant was queried why 
he did not list a January 1977 driving under the influence (DUI) arrest and a December 
2000 DUI arrest when asked “Have you ever been charged with or convicted with any 
offenses related to alcohol or drugs?” He answered “yes” and listed a January 2007 
DUI arrest in which all charges were dismissed and a November 2002 DUI arrest. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant explained that he did not list the 1977 “arrest” because he was not arrested. 
He was issued a citation and was later fined $150, discussed supra. He listed this 
citation on two previous security clearance applications he completed in 1979 and 
1988. Applicant testified that he was never charged or arrested for the January 1977 
incident contrary to what is listed on his FBI rap sheet. Applicant explained that he did 
not list the 2000 DUI arrest because he was ultimately charged with reckless driving 
not DUI. He listed the 2000 DUI on a 2002 security clearance application and 
disclosed and discussed it during a March 2004 OPM interview. (Vol. III, Tr. 436-446, 
459-461, 465-469; GE 12.) 
 
 With regard to his financial history, when Applicant was queried why he did not 
list a November 2007 $68,767 mortgage foreclosure when asked “Have you had any 
possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed?,” he 
responded none of his short sale properties had been voluntarily or involuntary 
repossessed or foreclosed in November 2009 when he completed his e-QIP. Applicant 
did not consider that any of his short sales he had undertaken in the summer of 2009 
fell into the category of voluntary or involuntary repossessions or foreclosures. 
Applicant explained that FA identified buyers for his properties and sold them by short 
sale. This occurred after going through the “strategic default” process of not making 
payments for a short period of time with the full knowledge and cooperation of the 
bank. The properties were then sold to a known approved buyer. (Vol. III, Tr. 418-423, 
426-427.) 
 
 When Applicant was queried why he did not list a $257 medical collection 
account and a $31,491 past-due mortgage account when asked “Have you been over 
180 days delinquent on any debts?” and “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on 
any debts?” He responded that the $257 medical collection account, discussed supra, 
did not go into collections until after he completed his November 2009 e-QIP. The 
past-due mortgage, also discussed supra, refers to the disputed property tax issue 
and as demonstrated by Applicant is a debt that he did not owe. Applicant explained 
that from 2002 to 2009, he was in a travel status “200 to 220 days a year.” He 
acknowledged that he “missed mail at times,” which was an unintended consequence 
of his work-related travel schedule. Applicant completed the e-QIP on an evening 
before a trip and stated, “all things considered, I thought I did a pretty accurate job of 
filling out the form.” Applicant added that, “I’m not sure I could have deliberately not 
disclosed [mortgage debt] when it doesn’t exist.” Applicant’s three investment 
condominiums had been resolved by September 2009 and his residence 
condominium did not go through the short sale process until 2010. The tax liability 
issue was also discussed, supra. (Vol. III, Tr. 423-436.) 
 
 Applicant explained that he has completed “seven or eight” security clearance 
applications over the past 42 years to include 10-year, 7-year, and 5-year updates and 
he has continuously held a security clearance during that entire time. Applicant has 
learned through the process of periodic reviews that everything previously submitted is 
a matter of record. Applicant noted that the security clearance applications typically 
ask for applicants to list events for the previous seven-year period, and at times has 
 
8 
 
 
found the questions to be unclear or ambiguous. Elaborating further and in discussing 
the question, “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offenses related 
to alcohol or drugs?,” he stated, “Well, my mistake, I obviously misread this. When the 
entire form, 25 times, virtually every other question, it’s a seven-year update, every 
other question says, “In the last seven years.” Applicant had no intention to mislead or 
commit a deliberate falsification. He noted that he inadvertently did not list his former 
wife and his daughter on his e-QIP; however, his failure to do so was accepted as a 
mistake. Applicant discussed his alcohol-related incidents with the drug and alcohol 
therapist/master addictions counselor, discussed infra.  (Vol. III, Tr. 446-459, 463-465, 
519-521, 543-548; AE E.) 
 
SOR ¶ 2.c – Alleges Applicant was arrested in January 1977 and charged with 
driving under the influence (DUI), found guilty, and ordered to pay a fine. In January 
1977, while attending pilot training, Applicant was pulled over by the police after dinner 
and drinks with some of his classmates and was administered a breathalyzer test.  
Applicant testified that the police informed him that he was not intoxicated and issued 
him a traffic citation and a summons. The following week he went before a judge, was 
fined $150, and was allowed to keep his driver’s license. Applicant reported the 
January 1977 incident as a “Traffic Violation” in Block 18 on his January 1979 security 
clearance application. He reported the January 1977 incident again as a DUI in Block 
21.c on his October 1988 security clearance application. Both security clearance 
applications resulted in favorable adjudications. (Vol. II, Tr. 141, 210-214, 224-227; 
Vol. III, Tr. 521-523; GE 14, GE 15, AE C.) 
 
SOR ¶ 2.d – Alleges Applicant was arrested in December 2000 and charged 
with DUI third conviction, plead nolo contendere, found guilty, and sentenced to pay a 
fine and placed on probation for 12 months. Applicant’s FBI “rap sheet” was 
apparently the source of this information. Applicant testified that he was pulled over by 
the police before he left a convenience store parking lot for having a taillight out. He 
admitted to the police officer that he had been drinking and refused to take a 
breathalyzer test. Applicant explained that he refused to take a breathalyzer based on 
the advice of friends who were attorneys and doctors. Applicant testified that the SOR 
allegation was incorrect, and stated that at trial the charge was reduced to reckless 
driving, he plead nolo contendere, and was convicted of reckless driving. Applicant’s 
copy of his official state driving record and Government arrest source documents 
confirm that his DUI was reduced to reckless driving and that he was convicted of 
reckless driving and not DUI. Applicant reported his 2000 arrest on a subsequent 
security clearance application as well as discussing it during a background 
investigation interview. (Vol. II, Tr. 262-268; Vol. III, Tr. 293-294, 459-462, 523-530; 
GE 9, GE 10, GE 12, AE D.) 
 
SOR ¶ 2.e – Alleges Applicant was arrested in November 2002 and charged with DUI 
first offense, plead nolo contendere, was found guilty, and sentenced to pay a fine and 
placed on probation for 12 months. Applicant testified that he was pulled over by the 
police on the way home after having dinner. As noted supra, Applicant admitted this 
allegation. He stated that he had completed a security clearance application in March 
 
9 
 
 
2002 and discussed this arrest as well as the December 2000 arrest during a 
background investigation interview in March 2004. (Vol. II, Tr. 269; Vol. III, Tr. 292-
303, 531-543; GE 3, GE 12.) 
 
SOR ¶ 2.f – Alleges Applicant was arrested in January 2007 and charged with 
DUI blood alcohol content of 20% or higher. The case was dismissed. Applicant was 
coming home from a New Year’s Eve party when he was pulled over by the police. 
When he went to court, the judge dismissed the case because of significant 
evidentiary problems with the state’s case. Applicant’s copy of his official state driving 
record confirms that the case was dismissed and there is no record of conviction. As 
noted supra, Applicant admitted this allegation.  (Vol. III, Tr. 303-311; AE D.) 
 
Applicant testified that he apprised his supervisors of the 2000, 2002, and 2007 
incidents and no adverse action was taken against him. (Vol. Tr. 311-312.) 
 
Applicant called a drug and alcohol therapist/master addictions counselor 
(DAT) as an expert witness. In March 2012, DAT prepared a comprehensive drug and 
alcohol evaluation on Applicant at the request of DOHA. DAT concluded that Applicant 
shows no signs of chemical dependency. DAT testified that Applicant is suitable for a 
security clearance where tact, wisdom, and critical thinking are involved. DAT 
provided extensive testimony in support of his diagnosis and conclusions.2 (Vol. II, Tr. 
19-54; AE E, AE F.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted his active duty Air Force officer performance reports (OPR) 
covering the period of November 1976 to July 1996, one citation for an Air Force 
Achievement Medal citation, one citation for an Air Force Commendation Medal, and 
five separate citations for the Meritorious Service Medal. His OPRs, awards, and 
statements document a 27-year career of sustained superior performance. Applicant 
described his military and post-military career in detail at his hearing. His 
accomplishments and contribution to the national defense are significant. (Vol. II, Tr. 
227-262; GE 6, AE TT through AE AAA.)  
 
Applicant called two character witnesses to testify on his behalf. Witness 1 (W-
1) is a co-worker and holds a security clearance. He stated that Applicant has a key 
company role in the manufacturing of military flight simulators. W-1 has worked with 
Applicant in close proximity for two years in a classified environment and found him to 
be very trustworthy and also found his conduct to be above reproach in a work setting 
as well as in a social setting. Witness 2 (W-2) W-2 is also a co-worker and holds a 
security clearance. He has also worked with Applicant in close proximity for one and 
one-half years in a classified setting. W-2 echoed similar testimony as W-1. Both W-1 
                                                          
2
 There are no Guideline G (alcohol consumption) security concerns alleged. To the extent that 
any of the Guideline E allegations raised an alcohol-related issue or concern, the expert witness, DAT, 
effectively and successfully rebutted them. 
 
10 
 
 
and W-2 strongly recommend Applicant for a security clearance. (Vol. II, Tr. 196-210, 
217-224.) 
 
Applicant testified that he is the only company employee who is able to perform 
the work he does, which is done in a highly classified environment. (Vol. III, Tr. 312-
317.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
 
11 
 
 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-
12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can 
normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s 
obligations under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that 
point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is 
not responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
Applicant’s credit reports reflect the alleged debts. The Government established 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about 
the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
 
12 
 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through (20(e). The unexpected decline in the value of real estate, increase in 
association fees, and subsequent requirement for condominium owners to pay county 
property taxes caused Applicant to have debts he could not afford to pay. His real 
estate problems were clearly affected by circumstances beyond his control. Applicant 
presented credible evidence that his decision to invest in CD was reasonable at the 
time based on available information. Unfortunately, Applicant’s real estate investments 
in CD did not net the expected results. Recognizing that his situation had made a turn 
for the worse, he sought professional advice and made the painful choice of letting his 
four properties go into strategic default. The end result was that Applicant owes the 
lender bank no money and was issued Form 1099s for all four properties.  
 
Applicant has settled, paid, or disputed in good-faith the remaining non-real 
estate related debts. While one can debate the timeliness of the resolution of some of 
these debts, I recognize that coordination of health care benefits does take time and 
the fact that Applicant may not have been aware that several of these debts were in 
arrears. When he did become aware his debts were delinquent as a result of these 
proceedings, he took appropriate and reasonable corrective action.  
 
 
13 
 
 
The Appeal Board explained that circumstances beyond one’s control can 
cause unresolved debt, and are not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not 
required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable 
plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, 
actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant took reasonable 
and responsible actions to resolve his SOR debts, establishing good faith.3 He 
established and maintained contact with his creditors.4 His financial problem is 
resolved, and his finances are under control. Applicant has learned from his financial 
mistakes, they are unlikely to recur; and they do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
                                                          
3
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
4
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
14 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process 
the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
  
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;5  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . . ; 
 
(2) . . . inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
                                                          
5
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
15 
 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; or 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
I find Applicant’s statements explaining why he did not provide derogatory 
financial information and two alcohol-related incidents to be credible. His omissions 
and misstatements were errors made through carelessness and oversights. Applicant 
has successfully and continuously held a security clearance for 42 years. He has 
completed seven or eight security clearance applications and undergone numerous 
background checks. Applicant knows that all of his past alcohol incidents are a matter 
of record and he reported the ones he believed were required on his November 2000 
e-QIP. I note that he listed two past alcohol incidents on his November 2009 e-QIP 
putting the Government on notice that he had previous issues with drinking and 
driving.  
 
Applicant’s explanation that he believed his debts were resolved or was 
unaware of alleged debts is equally credible. I also note within the same e-QIP, he 
neglected to list other required information further supporting his assertion that his 
omissions were careless, but not deliberate. While Applicant could reasonably have 
been expected to be more diligent about checking the status of his debts and reporting 
his past alcohol offenses, his judgment lapses are not enough to impute knowing and 
wilful falsification under Guideline E. He refuted the allegations that he intentionally 
falsified his November 2009 e-QIP. He regrets his mistakes and has been chastened 
by this process. Applicant would not make the same mistakes today.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.c through 2.f alleges four alcohol-related in 1977, 2000, 2002, and 
2007. These incidents were thoroughly discussed, supra. The 1977 incident appears 
not to have been an actual “arrest” and the 2007 incident resulted in a dismissal. As 
noted, to the extent these allegations raised alcohol consumption concerns; they were 
rebutted by the expert witness, DAT. See fn 2 supra. To the extent these incidents 
with three, two, and five-year gaps between them, respectively, with the most recent 
incident in 2007 that resulted in the charge being dismissed, raised additional 
concerns under this Guideline, such concerns were effectively rebutted by Applicant. 
Applicant complied with all court-imposed requirements and he notified his superiors 
of his DUI arrests. Given the significant collective contributions Applicant has made 
towards the national defense and time elapsed between incidents and lack of recency 
of these offenses, I find these events to be of limited security significance. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
16 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) applies to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.b to 2.d. Applicant did not 
arguably provide all derogatory financial information and all information pertaining to 
past alcohol-related incidents on his November 2009 e-QIP. He fully discussed the 
missing information during subsequent OPM investigative interviews, DOHA 
interrogatories, and during his DOHA-sponsored drug and alcohol assessment. AG ¶ 
17(e) fully applies to the four alcohol-related incidents supra. 
 
 In the instant case, Applicant disclosed the omissions, and he fully cooperated 
with the investigator’s follow-up interrogation. Applicant’s failure to provide derogatory 
financial information about his debts and his failure to fully disclose his alcohol-related 
arrests on his November 2009 was improper. If he failed to disclose this information, 
he did so out of carelessness and not with the intent to deceive the Government or he 
did not believe he was required to disclose the information. He disclosed the missing 
information during a subsequent OPM interview and corrected the omissions in good 
faith. His disclosure of the information eliminated any vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. Guideline E concerns are mitigated; however, assuming AG 
¶¶ 17(a), 17(e), and 17(f) are not applicable, security concerns are separately 
mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.6 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                          
6
In ISCR Case No. 09-05655 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2010), the applicant intentionally denied 
that he had private employment on his security clearance application (SCA) to conceal that employment 
from his employer. Fifty-one days later, ISCR Case No. 09-05655 at 5 (A.J. May 12, 2010), at his OPM 
interview, he “(1) corrected the omission in his SCA without first having been confronted with the facts; 
and (2) cooperated with the follow-up questioning by the investigator.” ISCR Case No. 09-05655 at 2 
(App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2010). The underlying security concern about that applicant’s private employment 
was resolved when he resigned from that company. He also received some positive character 
references. The Appeal Board affirmed the mitigation of the intentional and recent falsification of his 
SCA under the whole-person concept without ruling on the applicability of AG ¶ 17(a). 
 
17 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old site coordinator, who works for a defense contractor 
who that provides important work for DOD. He was awarded a bachelor of science 
degree in 1975. Before starting his second career as a defense contractor, he 
honorably served 27 years as an Air Force fighter pilot. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He deserves substantial 
credit for his military service and supporting the U.S. Government as an employee of a 
defense contractor. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States and 
his employer. He has had access to classified information for 42 years and there are 
no allegations of security violations. The unprecedented and unforeseen decline in 
real estate values contributed to his financial woes. I give Applicant substantial credit 
for seeking professional help to resolve his real estate-related problems and working 
aggressively to resolve his non-real estate debts. He received strong favorable 
endorsements from his employer and co-workers. His character witnesses described 
Applicant as personable, honest, knowledgeable, professional, compliant with rules, 
trustworthy, and loyal.  
 
Applicant lacked financial resources and needed to resort to short sales to clear 
his four mortgage debts. He also paid, settled, or disputed in good-faith his remaining 
non-real estate debts. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about 
 
18 
 
 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination). There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). He has since regained financial responsibility and lives a 
lifestyle consistent within his means. Applicant is an intelligent person, and he 
understands what he needs to do to maintain his financial responsibility. I am 
confident he will maintain his financial responsibility.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
and personal conduct concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
