 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 12-01438                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                 Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 23, 2011. On November 19, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On December 4, 2013, Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge at the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2014. I convened a 
 
2 
 
 
hearing on January 29, 2014, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 
through Ex. 6 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant testified, called no 
other witnesses, and introduced no exhibits. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the 
record open until February 10, 2014, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide 
additional information. 
 
Applicant timely filed 16 post-hearing submissions, which I marked as Ex. A   
through Ex. P.1 The Government did not object to the admission of Applicant’s post-
hearing submissions.2 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 6, 2014.  
 
                                    Procedural Matters 
 
In a discussion of preliminary matters at the beginning of the hearing, the 
Government moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing allegations 1.d., 1.f., and 1.h. 
Applicant did not object, and the Government’s motion was granted. (Tr. 9-11.)  
 
                                                    Findings of Fact 
 
 The amended SOR contains 11 allegations of financial conduct that raise 
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.3 The financial 
delinquencies alleged in the amended SOR total approximately $108,634. 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.i. and the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.m. He denied the allegations of delinquent 
debt at SOR ¶¶ 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., and 1.n. In his answers to the allegations at ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 
1.c., 1.e., 1.g., 1.i., and 1.m. of the amended SOR, Applicant asserted his belief that the 
age of the debts rendered them uncollectible under the statute of limitations in his state 
of residence. Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the amended SOR are entered 
as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.)   
 
 Applicant is married and 37 years old. He and his wife have two young children. 
When he was 18 years old, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. military, where he served on 
active duty for approximately three and one-half years. Thereafter, he served in   
National Guard units for an additional four years. Since 2001, he has been employed as 
a government contractor and has worked for his current employer. His most recent job 
                                            
1
Applicant included 15 submissions, with a cover sheet which contained information of an evidentiary 
nature. Accordingly, I marked the cover sheet as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ex.) A and then marked the 15 
remaining submissions as Applicant’s Ex. B through Ex. P. 
 
2 The Government’s e-mail of no objection is identified in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
3 The debts alleged on the amended SOR include four in charged-off status and seven in collection 
status. 
 
 
3 
 
 
title is systems engineering manager. He was first awarded a security clearance in 
1994. (Ex. 1; Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in information systems management and 
computer science in 2001. He began work on a master’s degree in strategy and 
leadership in 2006, but he did not complete the required thesis. He is currently enrolled 
in an executive master of business administration program. (Ex. 1; Tr. 87-89.) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant and his wife experienced marital difficulties. His wife left their 
home and moved with their young son to another state. Applicant continued to support 
his wife and child. In addition, the breakup was adversarial, and Applicant incurred 
substantial legal fees in an attempt to acquire custody of his son. (Tr. 27-29.) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant and his wife began marital counseling. In 2008, they 
reconciled, reestablished their marital relationship, and began to live together again. 
They had a second child in 2013. (Tr. 32, 99-100.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant owes a bank card creditor $29,284 on a 
charged-off account that had not been paid as of November 19, 2013. The SOR alleges 
at ¶ 1.m. that Applicant owes $6,086 to the same bank creditor, and the debt had not 
been satisfied as of November 19, 2013.  Applicant admitted both debts. (SOR; Answer 
to SOR.)   
 
 After completing his e-QIP in September 2011, Applicant was interviewed in 
October 2011 by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM). During the interview, Applicant stated that in 2007, he opened a 
line of credit with the bank identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.m. to pay divorce attorney 
fees. He claimed he made some payments on the debt, but he could not recall dates or 
specific amounts paid. He told the investigator he was seeking advice from legal 
counsel in order to settle the debt. (Ex. 2.) 
 
 In his June 2013 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he had 
disputed the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. He also stated that the debt had been sold to 
another creditor and the original creditor refused to accept payment. He stated that the 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.m. had been paid in full. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he 
attempted to contact the creditor after receiving the SOR in November 2013. In a post-
hearing submission, Applicant stated: “In 2012 [the creditor] sent me a 1099-C for 
Cancellation of Debt and I [filed] this form with my 2012 Federal Income Taxes as 
Income per the rules required by the IRS. Additionally, I paid on-time the resulting 
federal taxes for this [discharged] debt.” Applicant did not provide documentation to 
corroborate his claim that the delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.m. had 
been resolved. (Ex. 1; Ex. 3; Ex. A; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the $19,101 charged-off debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. When he was interviewed by an authorized investigator in 
October 2011, Applicant did not recognize the debt, which appeared as a collection 
 
4 
 
 
account on his credit bureau report of October 2011 and as a charged-off account on 
his credit bureau report of December 2013. Both credit reports show that the account 
was opened in 2008. (Ex. 2; Ex. 5; Ex. 6.) 
 
 When he responded to DOD interrogatories in June 2013, Applicant stated that 
he had disputed the account and the balance. At his hearing, he reported that, after 
receiving the SOR in November 2013, he attempted to contact the creditor to arrange 
for payment but had learned that the account had been sold to a collection agency, and 
the creditor would no longer accept payment.  (Ex. 3; Tr. 52-54.) 
 
 In a post-hearing submission, Applicant asserted: “In 2013, [the creditor] sent me 
a 1099-C for Cancellation of Debt and I plan on [filing] the form with my 2013 Federal 
Income taxes as Income per the rules required by the IRS. Additionally, I will pay the 
resulting federal taxes for this [discharged] debt.” Applicant did not provide 
documentation to corroborate his assertion. (Ex. A.) 
 
  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the $4,800 charged-off debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. When he was interviewed by an authorized investigator in 
October 2011, Applicant stated he was disputing the debt, then in collection status, 
because he had paid it. The debt appears on Applicant’s credit bureau reports of 
October 2011 and December 2013, with the notation that the account had been 
transferred or sold. Applicant’s credit bureau report of December 2013 indicates that the 
account was opened in March 2006. In June 2013, in response to DOD interrogatories, 
Applicant listed a zero balance for the debt. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he 
contacted the creditor after receiving the SOR in November 2013. He stated that the 
creditor told him it would provide him with contact information for the current holder of 
the debt, but Applicant had not received such information by the date of his hearing. He 
failed to provide information on the status of the debt in his post-hearing submissions. 
The debt remains unsatisfied. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Ex. 5; Ex. 6; Tr. 53-55.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a $1,286 debt, a partially-secured 
loan in charged-off status, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. However, in his answer, he also 
stated: “I contacted [the creditor] several years ago as this is not my account and I have 
no knowledge of this account. Based on the age of the debt, the statute of limitations [in 
Applicant’s state of residence] has expired for collecting on this debt.” (Answer to SOR) 
  
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. appears on Applicant’s credit bureau reports of 
October 2011 and December 2013. Both reports indicate that the account was opened 
in February 2009. When he was interviewed by an authorized investigator in October 
2011, Applicant stated that he had no knowledge of the account. (Ex. 2; Ex. 5; Ex. 6.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant stated that the statute of limitations in his state of 
residence “on revolving debt is 40 months or four years.” He further stated: “If, during 
that four year period of time, you reopen the debt, that reages it and it stays on your 
credit report. And so, by virtue of me trying to negotiate with any of these creditors. . . 
 
5 
 
 
who no longer own the debt, then it would reage that debt and stay on my credit report.” 
(Tr. 56.) 
 
 Applicant further explained that in 2010 and 2011, when the statute of limitations 
was expiring on some of his debts, he stopped contacting the creditors because he did 
not want to reaffirm the debts and have them remain on his credit report. However, in 
2013, when he received the SOR, he contacted some of the creditors again, but he did 
not contact the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant failed to provide information in 
his post-hearing submission to establish that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. had been 
satisfied. (Tr. 52-61.)  
 
 Applicant stated that his state statute of limitations argument applied also to the 
debts alleged in the SOR at ¶ 1.g. ($3,662) and ¶ 1.i. ($22,742). Applicant’s credit 
bureau report of October 2011 showed that the delinquent account alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.g. was opened in February 2010. The credit report also showed that the delinquent 
account alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i. was opened in May 2006 and identified as delinquent in 
September 2011. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he had not contacted the 
creditors identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.i. after receiving the SOR. In post-hearing 
submissions, Applicant failed to provide documentation that either debt was satisfied. 
(Ex. 5; Tr. 54.) 
 
 Applicant denied the delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j. ($4,490), ¶ 1.k. 
($7,182), ¶ 1.l. ($9,177), and ¶ 1.n. ($824). At his hearing, he stated that he had 
satisfied in full the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.l. In a post-hearing submission, he provided 
documentation to corroborate payment. (Ex. J; Ex. K; Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant also claimed he had satisfied the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.j., 1.k., 
and 1.n. The three delinquent debts were owed to the same creditor, and they were 
later sold to a successor creditor. In response to DOD interrogatories, Applicant stated 
that he had disputed the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.j. and 1.k., and they had been 
removed from his credit bureau reports. He also reported that debt alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.n., showing a $824 delinquency, had been satisfied. (Ex. 3; Tr. 55, 85-86.) 
 
 In post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided settlement offers, dated 
November 2009 and March 2010, from creditors holding the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.j. and 1.k. The creditor holding the delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j. offered to 
settle the debt for $660, and the creditor holding the delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.k. offered to settle the debt for $1,100. Applicant failed to provide documentation 
corroborating payment of the debts alleged on the amended SOR at ¶¶ 1.j., 1.k., and 
1.n. (Ex. O; Ex. P.)  
 
 In his post-hearing submissions, Applicant also provided information from the 
three national credit reporting services. The information indicated that he had disputed 
at least one unidentified debt, which had been investigated and the results 
communicated to him. At his hearing, Applicant stated that in 2008, he had investigated 
the possibility of resolving his financial delinquencies by filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
 
6 
 
 
However, he did not proceed because he learned that his income was above the limit 
allowed for filing for bankruptcy protection. When questioned about his plans for 
resolving his financial delinquencies, Applicant stated that he would wait until his 
creditors contacted him for payment. (Ex. E.; Ex. F.; Ex. G.; Ex H.; Ex. I.; Tr. 68-70.) 
  
 In May 2013, in response to DOD interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal 
financial statement. As a post-hearing submission, he provided a more up-to-date 
personal financial statement. He reported a net family monthly income of $12,567.4 His 
fixed monthly expenses total $5,575. (Ex. 4; Ex. B.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant stated that in January 2014, he purchased a home for 
$662,000.5 His down payment was approximately $32,000, and he financed the home 
with a home mortgage of $630,000. His monthly payments on the home mortgage are 
approximately $3,589. (Tr. 15, 37-39.) 
 
 Applicant purchased a 2006 Infiniti automobile in 2009 and a 2010 Honda 
Odyssey in 2012. On his recent personal financial statement, he valued the two vehicles 
at $23,000. He also listed $80,000 in bank savings and $175,000 invested in stocks, 
bonds, certificates of deposit, and a 401(k) savings account. He owes approximately 
$38,000 in student loans and is current on his payments. He stated that he has had 
financial counseling twice since 2008. (Ex. 4; Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D; Tr. 36-41.)  
 
                                                      Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                            
4 Applicant’s net monthly income is $9,567, and his wife’s net monthly income is $3,000 (Ex. 4; Ex. B.) 
 
5 On his May 2013 personal financial statement, Applicant reported that he did not own a home and paid 
monthly rent of $1,500. (Ex. 4.) 
 
7 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
8 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Between 2006 and 2008, Applicant accumulated substantial 
delinquent debt when he and his wife experienced marital difficulties, his wife 
subsequently left him, and Applicant incurred significant legal obligations and attorneys’ 
fees as he sought custody of his minor son. After Applicant and his wife reconciled in 
2008, he did not resolve the debts he had incurred, and he was unable or unwilling to 
pay his creditors. These delinquent debts are alleged on the SOR. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial difficulties and inattention to his financial 
responsibilities. While his debts arose in the past, many of them are ongoing, and they 
occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur. Applicant has been employed with 
his current employer since 2001, and he earns a good salary. While his marital 
difficulties from 2006 to 2008 may have been beyond his control when they occurred, he 
and his wife were reconciled and resumed their marriage in about 2008, nearly six years 
ago. Even so, Applicant has not addressed most of the delinquencies from the time of 
his marital separation, suggesting that he has not acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 In his answer to the SOR and in testimony, Applicant asserted his belief that his 
delinquent debts were unenforceable under his state’s statute of limitations. In ISCR 
Case No. 07-09966 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008), DOHA’s Appeal Board addressed an 
applicant’s reliance on the unenforceability of his debts under a state statute of 
limitations: 
 
Security clearance decisions are not controlled or limited by such statutes 
of limitation. A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed 
at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Accordingly, even if a delinquent debt is legally 
unenforceable under state law, the federal government is entitled to 
consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct 
in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
 
Moreover, the Appeal Board has also concluded that while an applicant may legally rely 
on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt, the applicant’s reliance 
does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve debts within the meaning of the 
Directive. See ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001). 
   
 DOHA’s Appeal Board has also explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or a statute of 
limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 06-14521 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007) (quoting ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
 
 Between 2006 and 2008, Applicant incurred significant delinquent debt.  Eleven 
of those debts are alleged on the SOR. To his credit, Applicant provided, in a post-
hearing exhibit, corroboration that he had satisfied the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.l. 
However, he failed to provide documentation establishing that the other ten 
delinquencies had been satisfied. At his hearing, he stated that he would pay the debts 
if the creditors contacted him for payment. Applicant has had financial credit counseling, 
and he recently took on considerable new debt when he purchased a home in January 
 
10 
 
 
2014. What is missing from his record is consistent payment of his debts over time. He 
has not established a track record that demonstrates that he can be relied upon to 
allocate his financial resources to satisfy his many financial delinquencies. I conclude 
that while AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) have limited applicability in this case, AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), and 20(c) do not apply in mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 37 
years. His financial problems began several years ago and are ongoing.  
 
Applicant’s efforts to address his financial delinquencies are minimal and recent. 
He does not have a reliable history of timely and consistent payment of his financial 
obligations. Despite a steady substantial income for several years, he has failed to 
budget his income to satisfy his delinquent debts.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment and reliability as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                       Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
11 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.:           Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d.:                      Withdrawn 
 Subparagraph 1.e.:                       Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f.:                        Withdrawn  
 Subparagraph 1.g.:                       Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h.:             Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 1.i. - 1.k.:            Against Applicant   
 Subparagraph 1.l.:                        For Applicant 
           Subparagraphs 1.m. - 1.n.:           Against Applicant 
  
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
