 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 12-00421    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant owes over $185,000 in unpaid federal and 
state taxes. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order DOD Directive,1 on July 23, 2013, the 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline. DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within DOD on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG were 
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace 
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on November 5, 2013. The items 
appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 8. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on 
November 25, 2013. He timely submitted a response, which is admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) 1. All of the documents were admitted without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on January 15, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 55, works as an information technology consultant for a federal 
contractor. He has held a security clearance since approximately 1977 without incident.2  
 
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he owes $185,000 in outstanding 
federal and state income taxes for the years 2008 through 2011 and 2009 to 2011, 
respectively. Applicant blames his tax problems on his divorce from his second wife. 
According to Applicant, the court ordered him to make monthly alimony and child 
support payments, totaling $5,500, from May 2008 until his divorce was finalized in 
November 2011. In addition to the monthly support payments, the court also ordered 
Applicant to pay his estranged wife a $26,000 lump sum. During the course of the 
divorce proceedings, the court also ordered Applicant to pay $38,000 of his wife’s 
attorney’s fees. Applicant, who is an independent contractor, claims that complying with 
the support orders made it impossible for him to pay his taxes.3  
 
 Between March 2010 and March 2011, Applicant paid $11,200 in taxes and 
penalties to resolve a 2008 state tax lien that was not alleged in the SOR. In addition to 
the $113 garnished from his military retirement pay, Applicant paid $5,500 toward his 
federal tax debt between December 2010 and March 2011. He did not make any federal 
tax payments for the next 23 months. In February 2013, Applicant retained an attorney 
to negotiate a settlement with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). In July 2013, 
Applicant’s counsel offered to settle Applicant’s federal tax liability for $49,000, or 30% 
of the amount due. As a show of good faith, Applicant claims to have made six 
payments between July and December 2013, totaling $12,300. Although he provided 
copies of certified mail receipts to the IRS, he did not provide proof of actual payment. 
The IRS has not responded to Applicant’s offer. Applicant has not made any payments 
toward his state tax liability since March 2011. 4 
  
                                                          
2 Item 3; AE A. 
 
3 Items 2-3, 6-8. 
 
4 Items 4 and 5. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant did not provide any financial records to support his claim that he could 
not comply with the court order and honor his obligation to pay his state and federal 
taxes between 2008 and 2011. According to his 2011 federal income tax return, 
Applicant claimed approximately $202,000 in gross income, which includes his 
$183,000 annual salary and $18,000 in military retirement. In the financial statement 
Applicant submitted to DOHA in April 2013, he reported having no cash or retirement 
savings. The statement also shows Applicant has $3,500 in disposable income; $2,200 
of which he claims is now paid to the IRS each month.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
5 Item 5; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”6 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
  Applicant admits he owes over $185,000 in combined federal and state taxes. 
The allegations are supported by the record.7 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to 
pay his debts as well as a history of not doing so.8 Applicant has not presented 
sufficient evidence to warrant the application of any of the financial considerations 
mitigating conditions. While Applicant’s divorce may have contributed to his difficulty, it 
does not entirely explain his tax problems or his sporadic efforts to resolve them.  
 
  As an independent contractor, Applicant bears sole responsibility for setting 
aside sufficient funds to pay his federal and state income tax obligations. Applicant did 
not establish that his recent tax problems are an isolated incident stemming from his 
separation and subsequent divorce. Nor is there any evidence to show that Applicant 
took measures to challenge or seek modification of what he considered an onerous 
support order. Applicant, in an understandably difficult position, chose to do nothing in 
the face of an immediate and compounding problem. Even now, his efforts to address 
his tax issues are insufficient to support a finding of financial rehabilitation. Applicant’s 
tax problems are recent, ongoing, and likely to recur given that he has not provided any 
evidence to the contrary.  His unresolved federal and state tax liabilities continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In reaching this conclusion, I have 
also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a).  Applicant has held a security 
clearance for over 35 years without incident. The Government does not have to prove 
that an applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,9 or that an 
applicant poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient 
to show that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make 
him more vulnerable to financial pressures.10 Furthermore, Applicant has failed to fulfill 
a basic obligation to the government; as such, it is not appropriate to continue his 
access to classified information at this time. This conclusion, however, does not 
preclude Applicant from demonstrating the requisite financial rehabilitation and reform in 
the future. Following Egan11 and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts 
in favor of protecting national security.  
                                                          
6  AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 GE 6-8; Answer. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
9 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989). 
  
11 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
