 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-00956 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 28, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an October 2, 2013, response, Applicant admitted four of the five allegations 
raised in the SOR and offered brief comments. He also requested a decision without 
hearing. Counsel for DOD prepared a Form of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 13 
attachments to support the Government’s position in this matter. Applicant did not 
submit a response or any additional information within the specified time period 
following his receipt of the FORM. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
 
 
 
 
2 
assigned the case to me on January 31, 2014. I have thoroughly reviewed the FORM 
and other case file materials. Based on the materials submitted, I find that Applicant 
failed to meet his burden in mitigating financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old engineering technician who has worked for the same 
employer since at least September 2002. He has been continuously employed since 
September 1998. Applicant served on active duty in the United States Navy from 1975 
to 1977, when he was honorably discharged. Applicant has a high school education. He 
has been separated from his wife since 1995. He has three grown children.  
 
 At issue are five delinquent debts noted in the SOR: 
 
1.a Collection Account - Telecommunications Account ($871). Unpaid. In his response 
to the SOR, Applicant admitted that this debt is unpaid, noting that he is “working out a 
payment plan to get this matter resolved as quickly as possible.” (FORM, Attachment 4) 
He previously stated that he had called the collection agent for this debt in 2009, and 
was told the agency had no record of the debt. (FORM at 6 of 13) 
 
1.b Collection Account - Medical Account ($229). Unpaid. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant wrote, “account is still unpaid, I have been in touch and currently have 
payment plan to get this matter resolved as quickly as possible.” (FORM, Attachment 4) 
No documentation supporting this assertion was submitted. There is no evidence the bill 
was related to emergency care. Applicant’s references to medical bills largely concern 
routine visits and tests, noted as generally covered by his health insurer. 
 
1.c Collection Account - Credit Card-Related Account ($627). No Evidence of Payment. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant related that he had negotiated a settlement of 
$418.43, and that the negotiated balance was paid in full in 2010. He presented no 
supporting documentation, however, substantiating his assertion that a settlement had 
been negotiated or that the obligation had been satisfied.  
 
1.d Charged-Off Account - Automobile Repossession ($18,092). Unpaid. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant conceded that this debt was unpaid and wrote, “I am 
working with lender for affordable repayment options. The multiple maintenance issues 
that were extremely expensive and ultimately caused me to fall behind in payments led 
to repossession of this vehicle.” (FORM, Attachment 4)  Applicant submitted no 
evidence of efforts to work with this creditor, nor did he provide any documentation 
reflecting any extraordinary expenses related to the maintenance of the vehicle at issue. 
 
1.e Delinquent Account - Credit Card-Related Account ($968). Unpaid. In his response 
to the SOR, Applicant wrote that this account is still unpaid, adding, “I am working out a 
payment plan to get this matter resolved as quickly as possible.” (FORM, Attachment 4) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
With regard to these delinquent debts, in general, Applicant wrote:  
 
I have worked hard to try and resolve all debts and I am currently 
making a good-faith effort to negotiate a payment plan on all accounts 
not currently resolved which are listed above. My financial obligations 
and trust are being re-established slowly and I have as always 
continued a solid record of excellent job performance, and will continue 
to the best of my ability to demonstrate my dependability and 
trustworthiness. (FORM, Attachment 4) 
 
With regard to the SOR, Applicant’s answers and comments were considered in 
the FORM. He provided no response or additional materials in relation to the FORM’s 
contents. His Personal Financial Statement reflects that he has a monthly net remainder 
of about $713.84, after expenses and about $400 in payments on some of the debts at 
issue. There is no documentary evidence, however, of regular monthly payments being 
made on those debts in the past few years.  
 
Financial issues have dogged Applicant since the mid 1990s, when he filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In 2001, his credit report reflected nearly $18,000 in debt and he 
was subject to a substantial Federal Tax Lien. (FORM at 10-11 of 13) He did not 
disclose any delinquent debts in either his 2011 or 2012 security clearance applications, 
although he discussed his delinquent debts and general finances in a 2011 personal 
subject interview. (FORM at 10-11 of 13) There is no documentary evidence showing 
that Applicant has received financial counseling. Applicant made reference to an 
investigator in late 2012 that he “was taking care of his ill mother,” but the comment 
lacks additional specificity. (FORM, Attachment 7, Subject Interview at 7) 
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
 
 
 
4 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts. Applicant admitted the majority of the debts cited were unpaid 
and he submitted no documentary evidence refuting the Government’s evidence. 
Therefore, the following financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions, however, could mitigate the security concerns raised in this case: 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has experienced intermittent financial issues since the mid 1990s. 
During that time, he has been continuously employed. The origins of, and 
circumstances related to, the multiple debts at issue are largely unexplained. The only 
references to facts potentially suggesting his financial difficulties were caused by 
something out of his control are to unelaborated automotive maintenance costs and an 
allusion to caring for his ill mother. In neither case does he document efforts to act 
financially responsibly under the circumstances. Moreover, there is no evidence 
Applicant received financial counseling or has disputed the delinquent debts at issue. 
Furthermore, there is no documentary evidence reflecting his purported efforts to 
address the debts at issue. Therefore, none of the mitigating conditions available under 
this guideline apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
limited facts and circumstances noted in this case. I incorporate my comments under 
 
 
 
 
6 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, others may have warranted additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old engineering technician who has worked for the same 
employer since late 2002. He has been continuously employed since 1998. Applicant 
served on active duty in the United States Navy for two years before being honorably 
discharged. He has a high school education. Applicant has been separated since 1995 
and has three adult children.  
 
Applicant has a history of adverse financial issues dating back to the mid-1990s, 
although he has been continuously employed for over 15 years. He has known the 
debts at issue have caused concerns since at least 2011. It can be deduced from the 
scant evidence presented by Applicant that his plan for addressing his debts is through 
negotiated settlements or repayment plans. However, no documentary evidence was 
submitted reflecting such efforts have been made. At present, there is no documentary 
evidence of progress on any of the debts noted in the SOR. The burden in these 
proceedings is placed on the Applicant. Based on the limited materials in the case file, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to carry his burden in this matter. Consequently, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline F.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
