1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-03924
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s decision to smoke marijuana while at a concert constituted a serious
exercise of bad judgment. Given its isolated nature, Applicant’s history of outstanding
job performance, and his sterling reputation in the community, the possibility of
recurrence is minimal. Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and personal conduct
security concerns. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On October 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines H, drug
involvement, and E, personal conduct.  The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG).
2
The government received Applicant’s answer on November 5, 2013. Applicant
admitted the allegations and requested a hearing. I was assigned the case on
December 16, 2013. On January 14, 2014, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling
the case for February 6, 2014.  At the hearing, I received two Government exhibits
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, in addition to seven Applicant exhibits
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G. Also, I considered the testimony of
Applicant and two character witnesses. The transcript was received on February 14,
2014. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old married man with two adult children. In the late 1970s,
he earned a bachelor of science degree in mechanical engineering. In 1980, he was
hired by a defense contractor. He has remained with this employer since then, and is
currently a senior advisory mechanical engineer. (AE D) He has held a security
clearance for more than 30 years. (Tr. 14)
Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to a high-level supervisor, he
has a “tremendously strong work ethic.” (AE C) A senior executive characterizes
Applicant as “one of the most productive, consistent, and reliable members of the
engineering team.” (AE D)
Applicant is very active in his community. According to a neighbor, he frequently
volunteered for parents’ groups when his children were in secondary school. Also, he
often contributes his engineering expertise to community projects, such as installing an
irrigation system at the neighborhood sports park. (Tr. 45)
In June 2011, Applicant went to an outdoor concert with his adult son. People
were smoking marijuana freely, sharing joints, and passing them around. As a joint
circulated around Applicant’s vicinity, he took it and smoked a few puffs before passing
it to another individual. (Answer at 1) Before this episode, Applicant had not smoked
marijuana since he was a teenager. Applicant testified that being at the concert with
people passing around marijuana cigarettes “took [him] back to the 1970s, [a]nd [he]
kind of lost track of maybe who [he] was and [how] old [he] was . . .” (Tr. 33)
Applicant’s employer knows about Applicant’s June 2011 use of marijuana. (Tr.
34, 41) His opinion of Applicant’s character and trustworthiness remains unchanged.
(Tr. 42) Applicant has not smoked marijuana since the episode at the concert, and he
has no intention of using it again. (Tr. 34)
 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
3
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant smoked marijuana at a
concert in June 2011. At the time, he held a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any drug
abuse,” and 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance,” apply.
Before this episode, Applicant had not used marijuana in more than 30 years. He
has not used it since then, and has no intention of using it again. He is highly respected
on the job and in his community. I conclude that this behavior is mitigated by AG ¶¶
26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent . . . that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment,” and 26(b)(3), “an appropriate period of abstinence,” apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. (AG ¶ 15)
Applicant’s decision to smoke marijuana at a concert in 2011 triggers the application of
AG ¶ 16(e), “personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect
the person’s personal professional, or community standing . . .” 
Applicant’s employer knows about his conduct, and still holds him in high regard.
The offense was both minor and isolated. AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so
4
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent . . . that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,”
applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s exercised bad judgment when he chose to smoke marijuana at a
concert. The nature and seriousness of this behavior was compounded by the fact he
held a security clearance at the time. Immaturity is not a relevant factor because
Applicant was in his mid-fifties when the episode occurred. Conversely, this was an
isolated episode, and Applicant has not used marijuana since then. There is no
vulnerability to coercion, as his employer is aware of the episode. On balance,
considering these facts, together with his impeccable reputation on the job and in his
community, I conclude that Applicant’s decision to smoke marijuana, though foolish,
was an anomaly, and is unlikely to recur. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
