 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00084 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas D. Farrell, Esq. 
 
 
February 28, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law, two sisters-in-law, brother-in-law, his 
wife’s cousin, and his wife’s uncle are citizens and residents of Taiwan. He has traveled 
to Taiwan annually since 2005 to visit them. His brother-in-law works for a governmental 
agency in Taiwan. Applicant failed to mitigate the resulting Foreign Influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on October 9, 2013, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on December 19, 2013. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on January 3, 2014, scheduling a hearing for January 
21, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf, called two witnesses, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 13, which 
were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant requested that the record be 
left open to allow him to submit additional evidence and his request was granted. On 
February 24, 2014, Applicant presented additional exhibits, marked AE 14 through AE 
28. Department Counsel had no objections to AE 14 through AE 28, and they were 
admitted into the record. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on January 28, 2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request to take Administrative Notice 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Taiwan. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the facts, with citations 
to 19 Government documents pertaining to Taiwan, marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I 
take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They 
are limited to matters of general knowledge, and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel made a motion to amend the SOR, in order 
to correct a clerical error in the lettering of the subparagraphs. The SOR contained two 
different allegations, both lettered as 1.e. The second 1.e was amended to be 1.f and 
the subparagraph labeled 1.f was changed to 1.g to keep them in alphabetical order. 
Applicant had no objections to the amendment. The motion to amend was granted. (Tr. 
26-27.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He was born and raised in the United States. He only 
speaks English. He has been employed by a government contractor since 1990. He has 
held a security clearance in connection with his current and prior employment, without 
incident, since the mid-1980’s. (GE 1; GE 2; AE 5; Tr. 36-50, 89-101.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because his 
mother-in-law, father-in-law, two sisters-in-law, brother-in-law, his wife’s cousin, and her 
uncle are all citizens and residents of Taiwan. His brother-in-law works for a 
governmental agency in Taiwan. Applicant visits his wife’s family members in Taiwan 
yearly. The SOR also identified that Applicant maintained a savings account, mutual 
funds, and stock accounts in Taiwan. Applicant admitted the presence of, and visits to, 
 
3 
 
his relatives in Taiwan as alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e. He denied 
that he maintained a savings account, mutual funds, or stocks in Taiwan, as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g. 
 
Applicant is married and resides with his wife. They do not have children. His 
wife was born in Taiwan. Applicant met his wife in 2002, while she was in the United 
States studying at a local university. When they began dating, he reported this 
relationship with a foreign national to his facility security officer (FSO), as required by 
security regulations. Applicant married his wife in April 2005 in the United States. He 
reported his marriage to his FSO. His wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
September 2011. She retains dual citizenship with Taiwan; however, she only uses her 
U.S. passport to travel. Applicant’s wife works for a local telephone company. (Tr. 53-
56, 60, 103-104.) 
 
Applicant’s wife knows little of what he does at work. Up until the week prior to 
the hearing, she only knew that he was an engineer for his company. She was not 
aware he had a security clearance until Applicant’s attorney told her in preparation for 
the hearing. She testified that Applicant does not talk about work at home.  (Tr. 58-59, 
106.) 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. They are both 
retired. Applicant’s father-in-law is 71 years old. He worked as an elementary school 
teacher. His mother-in-law is 70 years old. She worked as a low-level clerk in a 
government office, where she ran errands for her employer. Neither of Applicant’s 
parents-in-law speaks any English. Applicant’s wife is closest to her mother, but she 
loves both her parents. His wife and mother-in-law communicate by phone once per 
week. Applicant and his wife visit her parents annually in Taiwan. Applicant has no 
contact with his parents-in-law other than during their annual visits to Taiwan. (GE 3; AE 
2; AE 3; AE 4; AE 5; Tr. 61-63, 79, 84-85, 115-118.) 
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. He is 49 years old. 
He is employed as a manager for a Taiwanese government investigative agency. 
Applicant’s wife testified, “I actually don’t know his job as well . . . he did talk about [how] 
he will catch some criminals like a drug dealer.” The record is void of detailed 
information about the structure and purpose of the specific investigative agency for 
which he works. He is married. His wife (one of Applicant’s sisters-in-law) works as a 
registered nurse and is also a citizen and resident of Taiwan. Applicant’s wife calls her 
brother once per year before their annual trip and brings small presents to him when 
she visits him in Taiwan. Applicant has little contact with his brother-in-law and sister-in-
law. He sees them every two years for a couple of days in person. They have no 
telephone contact. Applicant’s brother-in-law and sister-in-law do not speak English, so 
they are unable to communicate directly with Applicant. (GE 3; AE 2; AE 3; AE 4; AE 5; 
Tr. 63-64, 81, 85, 111-112, 118.) 
 
Applicant’s other sister-in-law (his wife’s sister) is 38 years old. She is a citizen 
and resident of Taiwan, but attended school in the United States. She is not married 
and is unemployed. She speaks English. Applicant’s wife communicates with her 
 
4 
 
through texts frequently. Applicant’s wife is very close to her sister. (GE 3; AE 2; AE 3; 
AE 4; AE 5; Tr. 64-65, 67, 87, 120.) 
 
Applicant’s wife also has a cousin and an uncle that are citizens and residents of 
Taiwan. Her cousin works for a machinery company as a sales person. Her cousin 
speaks English. Her uncle is the president of a business. He cannot speak English. (GE 
3; AE 2; AE 3; AE 4; Tr. 66.) 
 
Applicant and his wife go to Taiwan annually to visit her family. Their first visit to 
Taiwan together was in 2005, after their marriage. They stay at Applicant’s parents-in-
law’s home for approximately two weeks each year on their visits. He last visited Taiwan 
in 2012. He reports all of his trips to Taiwan to his FSO. (GE 3; AE 2; AE 3; AE 4; Tr. 
68-70, 95-98, 110-111, 122.) 
 
Applicant’s wife individually maintained nine different accounts in Taiwan, 
including savings accounts, mutual funds, and stocks. Applicant did not know of her 
foreign holdings until he asked her when completing the DOHA interrogatories dated 
March 27, 2013. Their collective value totaled $141,820.90 as documented by 
Applicant. Applicant’s wife testified that the accounts were created over the course of 
her life for different purposes like a college fund, a wedding gift from her parents, 
savings from her first job, etc. She had not closed the accounts because she did not 
need the money and there was a high degree of difficulty involved in closing the 
accounts. She was required to personally go to each individual bank or brokerage in 
Taiwan where the accounts were opened with a special stamp and her passbook. She 
could not close the accounts on-line. However, in Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits, he 
documented that his wife had visited Taiwan and closed eight of the nine accounts. She 
transferred the money into U.S. accounts. She retains only one account in Taiwan, a 
stock valued at $4,869. She attempted to close this account, but was unable to close it 
due to securities regulations and the current reorganization of the company in which she 
holds the stock. (AE 10; AE 21 through AE 28; Tr. 70-78, 82, 87, 105-109, 123-127.) 
 
Applicant and his wife documented that they have assets in the United States 
totaling over $1,500,000. They have no delinquent debt and live frugally. All of 
Applicant’s extended family members live in the United States and are U.S. citizens. 
(AE 14 through 20; Tr. 98-103.) 
 
Applicant is the foremost expert in his field, according to a witness that testified 
on his behalf. The witness spoke highly of Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and loyalty to 
the United States. Applicant recently won the most prestigious award his company has 
for his contributions. He has been deemed a “National Treasure” by his management. 
He also has been awarded a number of other awards for his excellent performance. His 
performance appraisals show he is relentless in his pursuit of technical excellence; 
exceptional in his problem solving abilities; and is an excellent mentor, technical lead, 
and a great role model. He receives annual training on industrial espionage. (AE 11; AE 
12; AE 13; Tr. 36-50, 89-95.) 
 
 
 
5 
 
Taiwan 
 
 In 1979, the United States changed its diplomatic recognition from Taipei to 
Beijing and recognized the People’s Republic of China (PRC) as the sole legal 
government of China. However, the United States maintains unofficial relations with 
Taiwan through the American Institute in Taiwan. The United States provides no 
developmental assistance to Taiwan, but has engaged in the sale of Apache helicopters 
to Taiwan. (AE 6 through AE 9.) 
 
 Taiwan was identified as an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence in the 
National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage. Additionally, there have been various 
court cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted 
dual-use technology to Taiwan, including a criminal conviction of the Principal Deputy 
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs for illegally removing 
classified materials. The PRC also maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through 
a bureau utilizing PRC nationals with Taiwanese connections. (HE I) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
 
6 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The following conditions could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information;  
 
7 
 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
  
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires the presence of family members (or business or professional 
associates, friends, or other persons) who are citizens and/or residents of a foreign 
nation and substantial evidence of a heightened risk. Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-
in-law, brother-in-law, two sisters-in-law, his wife’s uncle, and her cousin are all citizens 
and residents of Taiwan. The heightened risk required to raise one of these 
disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Taiwan is a country that actively 
collects industrial information and engages in industrial espionage, and therefore a 
heightened risk is present. His brother-in-law’s managerial position in the government of 
Taiwan also presents heightened risk through those family ties. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(a), with respect to Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law, 
brother-in-law, two sisters-in-law, his wife’s uncle, and her cousin.  
 
  Applicant’s connections to his brother-in-law, a manager for a Taiwanese 
governmental investigative agency, also create a potential conflict of interest between 
Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and his desire to 
help his brother-in-law or his wife’s other family members by providing that information. 
AG ¶ 7(b) applies.  
 
  Applicant’s wife, with whom he shares an apartment, has a close emotional 
connection to her mother and sister. Although she is not as close to her father and 
brother, she also keeps in contact with both. Each relationship could potentially create a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion due to her 
bonds to her Taiwanese family members and Taiwan’s history of efforts to commit 
industrial espionage. AG ¶ 7(d) applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 7(e) requires the presence of a substantial business, financial, or property 
interest in a foreign country, and evidence of a heightened risk associated with that 
foreign interest. Applicant’s wife only has $4,869 worth of stock still in Taiwan. Applicant 
and his wife’s joint assets in the United States total $1.5 million. The stock in Taiwan 
belongs solely to Applicant’s wife. Her Taiwanese stock holdings represent less than 
1% of their entire combined net worth. This does not represent a “substantial business, 
financial, or property interest,” and it is not owned by Applicant. AG ¶ 7(e) does not 
apply. 
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has lived his entire life in the United States. All of his assets are in the 
United States. His extended family and friends reside here. He has devoted his 
professional life to working for government contractors. He has made significant 
contributions to the security of the United States through his work and is recognized as 
a national treasure by his employer. He reported his relationship to his FSO when he 
started dating his wife and when they married in 2005. He testified that he 
communicates with his wife’s relatives infrequently because they do not share a 
common language. These factors weigh in the Applicant’s favor and are mitigating, in 
part. 
 
However, without knowing more details about Applicant’s brother-in-law’s 
governmental job and the Taiwanese agency for which he works, I cannot hold that it is 
unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests 
of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 
that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; or 
that there is little likelihood that his foreign relatives could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. Applicant bears the burden to introduce sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the Government’s concerns with respect to those issues, and he has not met 
this burden.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a patriotic American citizen, whose work has been of particular value 
to our military mission. However, his brother-in-law is a manager for a governmental 
investigative agency in Taiwan. Taiwan is an active collector of U.S. industrial 
intelligence. The potential for conflict of interest, pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress is insufficiently mitigated by the record evidence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
