 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01822 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s connections to family members and friends in Egypt are outweighed 
by her connections to family members and friends in the United States. She has 
established deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. Her 
financial interests in Egypt are de minimis when compared to her financial and property 
interests in the United States. She can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2010, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to her, 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence), Guideline K (handling 
protected information), and Guideline E (personal conduct) on March 5, 2013.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 25, 2013, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
The case was assigned to me on November 21, 2013. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on November 27, 2013, 
scheduling a hearing for December 17, 2013. Applicant requested a postponement, and 
the hearing was rescheduled for January 15, 2014. At the hearing, the Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. GE 1 and 2 were admitted without objection. GE 3 is 
a request for me to take administrative notice of facts concerning Egypt. Department 
Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and context for those facts. 
Applicant did not object and I took administrative notice as indicated in this decision. GE 
3 was considered, and attached to the record, but not admitted into evidence. 
 
Applicant testified and presented nine exhibits (AE A through I), which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 23, 
2014.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
On November 6, 2013, Department Counsel moved to amend the statement of 
reasons by withdrawing the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c, and by withdrawing SOR ¶¶ 2 and 
3, in their entirety. (Appellate Exhibit 1) I granted the amendment. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e. 
She denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old linguist employed by a government contractor. She 
was born and raised in Egypt to Egyptian parents. She completed her bachelor’s degree 
in Egypt in 1983. Her college education was funded by the Egyptian government. After 
college, she worked for a private company for a period. (Tr. 16) She never married and 
has no children.  
 
Appellant’s father passed away when she was 13 years old. Her mother passed 
away in 1987. After her mother passed away, Applicant entered the United States under 
a six-month tourist visa in 1988, which she later extended for another six months. She 
came to the United States to be close to her older sisters, who were living in the United 
States. She helped her sister by taking care of her sister’s children. Applicant attended 
college in the United States during 1989-1990, and changed her tourist visa to a student 
visa. She then obtained a job with another foreign government mission in the United 
States and received a work visa. Applicant then applied for and received religious 
asylum. She is a practicing Coptic Orthodox. (AE G) 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001, and received her U.S. 
passport in 2009. She considered herself a dual citizen of Egypt and the United States 
until 2002, when her Egyptian passport expired. She never renewed her Egyptian 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
passport. Applicant travelled to Egypt in 1996, 1999, and November 2005, to visit her 
family and friends. During each visit, she stayed in Egypt for approximately 15 days.  
 
Between 2000 and early 2006, Applicant worked for private companies in the 
United States, but she was unemployed during the latter part of 2006. From January 
2007 to March 2009, she worked as a linguist for a government contractor in Iraq 
providing support to U.S. personnel. Applicant was granted a secret security clearance 
in 2008. She possessed the clearance, without any concerns, until she was let go from 
her job when her employer lost its government contract in August 2013. Applicant 
received a thank you letter, signed by a brigadier general, and a certificate of 
appreciation for her dedication, hard work, and sacrifice while translating documents for 
U.S. forces in Iraq during 2007-2008. (AE A) 
 
Applicant worked for another government contractor as an Arabic linguist from 
August 2009 to August 2013. She received a National Intelligence Meritorious Unit 
Citation for meritorious service and exceptional achievement during 2011-2012. (AE A) 
Her performance evaluations indicated she was considered to be a very good 
employee. Her employment ended when the contractor lost its government contract, but 
she was in good standing with the company and was eligible for rehire. (AE B) 
 
Applicant’s brother and his wife are citizens and residents of Egypt. Her two 
nephews are citizens of Egypt, but they currently are residents of the United States. She 
has monthly contact with her brother. One of her nephews was a soldier in the Egyptian 
army. Applicant testified that her brother was a resident of the United States and worked 
as a machinist until he retired from his job. After his retirement, he returned to live in 
Egypt. Her nephews are currently working and attending colleges in the United States. 
They immigrated to the United States because of religious discrimination in Egypt. 
Additionally, she has long-time friends with whom she has contact who are citizens and 
residents of Egypt. She has contact with her Egyptian friends four times a year. 
 
Applicant’s sisters, her husbands, and their children are naturalized U.S. citizens 
residing in the United States. One of her brother’s-in-law was a soldier in the Egyptian 
army. Applicant’s boyfriend is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing in the United States. He 
also was a soldier in the Egyptian army. 
 
Applicant has an Egyptian bank account with a value of $4,747. When her father 
passed away, she and her siblings inherited a pension paid by the Egyptian 
government. She receives $100 a month from her father’s pension. (Tr. 39) When she 
immigrated to the United States, Applicant gave a power of attorney to a banker to 
manage the pension bank account for her. (Tr. 35-39) Following her instructions, the 
banker provided some of the money to her brother for him to send it to her or to donate 
to her church. Applicant denied having any additional property or financial interests in 
Egypt. 
 
Applicant testified that the Egyptian government suspended the payment of her 
pension. She explained that she has to submit evidence that she is alive and married for 
the pension to be reinstated. Also, the power of attorney expired and she would have to 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
travel to Egypt to establish a new power of attorney. She has not travelled to Egypt 
since 2005. She does not intend to travel to Egypt again. She requested her brother to 
help her close her Egyptian bank account, but she believes she would have to go to 
Egypt to close it. She also believes that the bank account will be closed by attrition. The 
pension is no longer being paid, and in time, the bank fees will consume the money in 
the account.  
 
Applicant’s U.S. assets include two investment accounts with a value of over 
$20,000, a retirement account worth $7,687, a $191,967 bank account, and two real 
estate properties. She testified she purchased one of the properties in 2003 for 
$235,000 with a down payment of $60,000. She said she put a $150,000 down payment 
on a second property in July 2012. (AE I - The deed, however, indicates the only 
consideration given to the grantor was $10.00.) 
 
Applicant submitted several references’ statements. She is considered to be 
competent, dependable, and dedicated professional. In their opinion, Appellant is 
trustworthy, and she is committed to the United States. A fellow linguist who worked 
with her in Iraq stated that in her free time, Applicant volunteered to work in U.S. military 
hospitals. (Tr. 21)  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Egypt and its 
relations with the United States: 
 
Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world. In the past, it has been a 
strategic partner of the United States and the two countries have enjoyed a strong 
friendly relationship. The United States is facing a series of challenges stemming from 
dramatic changes in Egypt.  
 
On July 3, 2013, the Egyptian military ousted former President Muhammad Morsi 
from power. In August 2013, the military-backed government began a violent police 
crackdown against Morsi’s Islamist supporters, which include members of the Muslim 
Brotherhood. Since then, radical groups have waged an insurgency against the security 
services. Militants from Al-Qaeda groups have attacked police, army, and government 
facilities, employing terrorist and guerilla warfare tactics. 
 
Political protests and demonstrations have turned violent. There are instances of 
instability, public disorder, and extremist activity in Egypt. The U.S. State Department 
issued a travel alert to U.S. citizens traveling to or living in Egypt about the continuing 
possibility of political and social unrest, incidents of which led to recent violence. Due to 
the political climate, there is a potentially more permissive operating environment for 
criminal and terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, which the U.S. State Department 
designated a foreign terrorist organization. 
 
Human rights abuses are rampant in Egypt. Violent clashes with police at 
demonstrations are a continuing concern. Problems also include torture, arbitrary 
arrests, limits on the judiciary, and restrictions on civil liberties. 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Egypt considers all children born to Egyptian fathers to be Egyptian citizens even 
if the child is not issued an Egyptian birth certificate or passport. Dual nationals residing 
in Egypt for more than six months require proof of Egyptian citizenship. Male dual 
nationals staying in Egypt for more than six months and who have not completed 
military service must obtain an exemption certificate before they can leave. Individuals 
who travel to Egypt on their Egyptian passport are normally treated as Egyptian citizens. 
The ability to provide U.S. consular assistance to those traveling on Egyptian passports 
is extremely limited. 
 
Policies 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.2  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and 
obligation with her brother and his family, and with long-time close friends, who are 
citizens and residents of Egypt. The extent of her close relationship with her relatives is 
                                            
2  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
demonstrated by her frequent contacts with them. She visited Egypt in 1996, 1999, and 
2005. She also was receiving a pension from the Egyptian government, and has $4,747 
in a bank account in an Egyptian bank. 
 
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Egyptian agents, criminals, or terrorists 
operating in Egypt may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified 
information about the United States. With its negative human rights record and its 
government disfunction, it is conceivable that Applicant or her family members could be 
subject to coercion.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the Government. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant left Egypt in 1988, at 30, to be close to her sisters and their families in 
the United States. She has lived in the United States for over 25 years. She became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001. During this period, Applicant travelled to Egypt in 1996, 
1999, and 2005. She vacationed in Egypt for approximately 15 days in each occasion. 
She has no intention to travel to Egypt again. She has established deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. The last time she visited 
Egypt was nine years ago. Her Egyptian passport expired in 2002, and she never 
renewed it. 
 
Applicant has significant property and financial interests in the United States, 
including two investment accounts ($20,000), a retirement account ($7,687), a $191,967 
bank account, two real estate properties with an estimated purchase price of over 
$400,000, and her job. From January 2007 to August 2013, Applicant worked for 
government contractors and held a secret clearance without any proven security 
incidents. She worked as a linguist in Iraq providing support to deployed U.S. personnel, 
and in an important translation of documents project for a U.S. agency. She was 
commended for her performance on both occasions. Additionally, she has strong ties in 
their community as shown by her participation and involvement in the Coptic Orthodox 
church.  
 
Applicant has a strong affection and sense of obligation to her brother and his 
family, as well as to her friends residing in Egypt. Notwithstanding, her brother’s sons 
and her sisters (and their families) are living in the United States. Her sisters are 
naturalized U.S. citizens. Because most of Applicant’s relatives are living outside of 
Egypt, the security concerns are less. It is unlikely that the government of Egypt will be 
able to use Applicant’s relatives living outside of Egypt to manipulate or coerce her.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant is not able to fully meet her 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationships with her relatives, 
friends, and associates who are Egyptian citizens and living in Egypt] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(a) has limited applicability and does not 
mitigate the foreign influence concerns. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with her family and friends living 
in Egypt. Although there is no evidence that Egyptian government agents, criminal 
elements, or terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or her family living in 
Egypt because of her work for the United States, she is nevertheless potentially 
vulnerable to threats and coercion made against her family living in Egypt. Egypt 
currently has no interests inimical to those of the United States. Notwithstanding, there 
is a lot of political and social unrest in the country. It is possible that a new Egyptian 
government could actively support terrorism and be repressive to its own citizens. The 
U. S. State Department has warned of the danger of travel to Egypt for both solely U. S. 
citizens and those holding dual citizenship with Egypt. 
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is whether Applicant has “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant worked for government 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
contractors since 2007, and held a clearance. There is no evidence that she ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified or sensitive information. There 
is no evidence of any security concerns or issues concerning her ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
Applicant’s sisters and their families, and her boyfriend are U.S. citizens living in 
the United States. Applicant has significant financial and property interests in the United 
States. She credibly testified that her loyalty is to the United States. She was deployed 
to Iraq in support of U.S. personnel in that country. Additionally, she provided valuable 
services to U.S. agencies translating important documents. Her actions show that she 
intends to live and retire in the United States. Applicant’s actions show that “[she] can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) applies in part with respect to Applicant’s brother and her extended 
family members living in Egypt. Their contact and communication is infrequent; 
however, she cannot establish that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk of 
foreign influence. AG ¶ 8(d) does not apply because Applicant’s contacts and 
relationships with his family in Egypt are not on behalf of the U.S. Government. AG ¶ 
8(e) is not raised by the facts in this case and do not apply. AG ¶ 8(f) applies because 
the value of Applicant’s financial interests in Egypt is outweighed by her financial and 
property interests in the United States. It is unlikely that she would be subject to 
influence or pressure based on her Egyptian pension or bank account. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to her brother, extended family members, and 
friends living in Egypt are outweighed by her connections to her siblings, extended 
family members, and friends living in the United States. She has established deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States and she can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. The mitigating information 
taken together is sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns 
under Guideline B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B in my whole-person 
analysis. Considering the evidence as a whole, including her service in Iraq and in the 
United States in support of U.S. interests, I find that Applicant’s favorable evidence is 
sufficient to demonstrate that her contacts and financial interests in Egypt do not pose a 
security risk.  
 
I have carefully assessed Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at her hearing, and 
I find her statements to be credible. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and 
the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant has carried her burden and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b,  
   1.d, and 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:     Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2 Guideline K:    Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
