 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 12-03692 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brendan Lill, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 7, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines B and C. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me December 6, 2013. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
6, 2014. Applicant waived his right to have 15 days from the date of the notice to the 
hearing. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 15, 2013. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into the record without objection. 
The Government requested administrative notice be taken of Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
There was no objection, and I granted the request. Applicant requested administrative 
notice be taken of HE II. There was no objection, and I granted the request. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. He offered Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted 
into the record without objection. The record was held open until January 29, 2014, to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He timely submitted AE K though AE O, 
which were admitted into the record without objection.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
1.d, 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, 2.d, and 2.f and denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.b and 2.e. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 68 years old. He was born in an Eastern European country and 
immigrated to Israel when he was five years old. He was an Israeli citizen and resident 
from 1950 to 1976. He completed two years of compulsory military service from 1964 to 
1966. He completed his undergraduate degree in 1971. He married in 1974 and 
completed his master’s degree in 1975. In 1976, he and his wife immigrated to the 
United States so he could pursue a doctorate degree. The United States offered the 
best programs in his area of expertise. He completed his doctorate in 1979 and pursued 
a career in academia. Applicant has three grown children who were all born and live in 
the United States. He became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1987 and his 
wife in 1991. Applicant has held a security clearance for approximately 22 years.  
 
 Applicant has spent approximately 32 years of his career in academia and 
worked in government defense-sponsored programs at universities. He worked for a 
consulting firm for a few years in the early 1980s before returning to a university post. 
He estimated that from 2003 to 2013 he has traveled outside of the United States 47 
times. 
 
 Applicant held an Israeli passport prior to 2001. By Israeli law, Israeli citizens are 
required to use valid Israeli passports when entering or exiting Israel. Following a 
security clearance investigation in 2001, Applicant agreed to have his Israeli passport 
shredded, per guidance he received from the Defense Security Service (DSS). His 
security clearance was renewed in 2002. Applicant provided confirmation from the 
university’s security officer regarding the shredding of his passport.2  
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s memorandum is HE III. 
 
2 Answer to SOR; AE G. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In 2004, Applicant, his wife and children decided to travel to Israel to visit his then 
97-year-old mother. Before leaving the United States, Applicant was briefed by the 
security staff at the university where he was working about traveling to Israel. The entire 
family traveled on their U.S. passports. The children, who were born in the U.S., never 
had Israeli passports. Applicant’s wife’s Israeli passport had expired in 2001 and was 
not renewed. When Applicant and his family arrived in Israel they were told they would 
not be permitted to leave without valid Israeli passports. They were directed by the 
Israeli passport control person to settle the issue of the Israeli passports with the 
regional office of the Ministry of the Interior (MOI).  
 
When they visited the regional office of the MOI, Applicant advised them that 
they did not have Israeli passports with them. He felt it was unwise to tell them that he 
had his shredded and his wife did not apply to renew hers and it had expired in 2001. 
By Israeli law, children of Israeli citizens are automatically considered Israeli citizens, 
even if they do not reside in Israel and have never visited Israel. They were told the 
children had to obtain Israeli passports in order to be permitted to leave Israel. Two of 
his children were over the age of 18 and were not permitted to leave Israel until they 
received authorization from the recruiting office granting them permission because 
neither had performed the compulsory military service. The office manager of the MOI 
agreed to provide Applicant and his wife a one-time permit to exit Israel without Israeli 
passports, with the warning that they would be required to have such passports for 
future visits. Upon returning to the United States, Applicant was debriefed by the 
university security staff about his trip, and he informed them about the passport 
incident.3  
 
 In 2005, Applicant’s mother passed away in Israel and he traveled to Israel to 
attend her funeral. Applicant arrived at the Tel Aviv airport with his U.S. passport, and 
he was permitted to enter Israel. He was again told he would not be permitted to exit 
without a valid Israeli passport and to settle the issue with the regional MOI. A few days 
after the funeral, he went to the regional office of the MOI and their computer records 
showed Applicant had entered Israel the previous year without an Israeli passport, and 
he was told that they would not issue another exit permit. Applicant had to obtain a new 
passport to be allowed to leave the country and pay a fine for not taking care of his 
missing Israeli passport.4  
 
 When Applicant returned to the United States, he reported what had happened to 
the university security office. The security staff contacted DSS for guidance on how to 
handle the matter. DSS determined that Applicant should surrender his Israeli passport 
to the university security officer and it would be stored in their safe. It was clear to 
everyone concerned that it would not be possible for Applicant to travel to Israel again 
without an Israeli passport, and that it was not a good idea to shred the Israeli passport, 
which could create another problem if there was future travel to Israel, since Applicant 
                                                          
3 Answer to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 Answer to SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
 
would have to explain why he no longer held the passport. Applicant retained his 
security clearance throughout this whole time and a new investigation was not initiated.5  
 
 In July 2006, Applicant took a new job at another university. He followed the 
guidance from the first university and transferred his passport to the new university’s 
security office. A new security clearance review was initiated, and Applicant retained his 
security clearance. The new university maintained control of Applicant’s Israeli 
passport.6  
 
During an interview with a government investigator on August 18, 2011, 
Applicant stated that in 2006, he had addressed his concerns with an agent from the 
Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS). He also had discussions about the 
ramifications of renouncing his Israeli citizenship with an agent from another 
government agency. After his discussions, he was advised it was better if he retained 
the passport. He told the government investigator that he would relinquish his Israeli 
passport and renounce his Israeli citizenship, but there were concerns because this is 
not a common occurrence and could be considered suspicious. It was mutually agreed 
upon with the agent of the government agency that renouncing his Israeli citizenship 
could result in unforeseen consequences. Applicant testified that he also had 
discussions with DSS personnel. The concerns were that the renunciation would “raise 
flags” to the Israeli government and might require him to explain why he was 
renouncing, thereby highlighting that he held a U.S. security clearance. There could 
also be various international organizations that target Israel that could become aware of 
his renunciation and might create an impression with Israeli security forces that he is 
somehow against Israeli policy. DSS conferred and deliberated with other government 
agencies and provided the solution to Applicant’s “catch-22,” that the university security 
office would maintain control over the passport.7 
  
 While at the new university, Applicant checked out the Israeli passport twice. He 
provided documents and log entries confirming his requests and retrieval of the 
passport.8 He retrieved it once in July 2007, when he visited Israeli to attend an 
academic promotion meeting at an Israeli university, and the second time was in 
October 2010 to attend a symposium. In both cases, he retrieved his Israeli passport, 
and he redeposited it with the security office as soon as he returned from these trips. He 
reported these trips on his foreign travel report as part of the Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). After his July 2007 trip, Applicant underwent a 
security clearance review and he continued to hold his security clearance. After the 
                                                          
5 Answer to SOR. 
 
6 AE A, F; Answer to SOR. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
 
2010 trip, a new investigation was initiated, and Applicant provided the same 
information for the investigation as he did in 2001, 2006, 2007 and 2010.9  
 
Applicant’s Israeli passport has always been in the possession of the university’s 
security office, except when he traveled to Israel. Applicant has used his U.S. passport 
for all other travel. His use of the Israeli passport was only to satisfy Israeli travel 
requirements. He retained the Israeli passport and did not destroy it at the direction and 
guidance of DSS. Applicant credibly testified that his loyalty and allegiance is to the 
United States. He specifically noted that he has made contributions to the United States’ 
national security since 1980, seven years before he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen.10 
   
 Applicant testified at his hearing that he was willing to renounce his Israeli 
citizenship. To further mitigate any potential security concerns, after the conclusion of 
the hearing and while the record was open, Applicant took additional steps to renounce 
his Israeli citizenship. He directed his security officer to surrender his Israeli passport to 
the Israeli consulate for destruction. On January 27, 2014, the security officer complied 
with Applicant’s request. Included in the letter to the consulate is a “Declaration of 
Waiver of Israeli Citizenship” that was completed and signed by Applicant on January 
23, 2014.11 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s Israeli passport expired in 2001. She used it twice in 1998 to 
visit her sick mother and then to attend her funeral. When she and Applicant visited 
Israel in 2004, she received an exit waiver from the Israeli MOI. She has not renewed 
her Israeli passport. 
 
 Applicant’s three children were required to obtain Israeli passports when they 
exited Israel in 2004. They have not used the passport since then. His youngest son’s 
passport expired in 2009. It has not been renewed. The older children’s passports 
expire in 2014. Applicant does not believe his children have plans to travel to Israel and 
have only used their U.S. passports when traveling outside the United States. None of 
his children actively applied to be dual citizens of Israel. None intend to reside in Israel. 
None speak Hebrew.12 
 
 Applicant’s brother is an Israeli citizen and resident. He retired from the Israeli 
Defense Force. He retired more than 30 years ago. After retirement he sold insurance. 
He retired from this job about five years ago. Applicant and his brother correspond 
about once or twice a month through Skype. His brother visited him about 15 years ago. 
                                                          
9 Answer to SOR. 
 
10 Answer to SOR. 
 
11 AE K, L, M, N, O. 
 
12 Answer to SOR.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant rarely talks with his brother’s wife. She retired from the insurance business 
about ten years ago.13 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s sister and her husband are citizens and residents of Israel. His 
brother-in-law is the chief executive officer of a private company. Applicant may talk to 
him once a year. His sister-in-law is a nurse. She works at a hospital a couple of nights 
a week. Applicant’s wife talks to her sister about once a month. Applicant may 
acknowledge greetings with her if the opportunity presents itself.14 
 
 Applicant and his wife had a bank account in Israel before they immigrated to the 
United States in 1976. Due to Israeli laws, they were not permitted to take money out of 
Israel until about the mid-1990s. Their parents passed away at different times and parts 
of their estates were transferred to their bank account. The account has been declared 
annually with Applicant’s tax returns and disclosed during all of his security reviews. 
Once the estate issues of their parents were settled, Applicant and his wife could 
address closing the account, which they did in 2010. The account was closed in 2011, 
and the funds were transferred to their account in the United States. It was a 
complicated and expensive process. Applicant no longer has any foreign bank 
accounts.  
 
 Applicant co-owns a small house with his brother that they inherited when their 
mother passed away. They share an equal interest in the property. Although Applicant 
estimated the value of the house to be about $100,000, he had no specific data to 
support the estimate. Neither he nor his brother knows the real value of the house. It 
was built by his parents. The house was not well maintained and is in an undesirable 
part of a city. Applicant indicated that he was not in a position to handle any issues 
related to the house and in 2011, he signed a power of attorney for his brother to handle 
the matter. His brother has attempted to sell the property, but it is difficult. It is currently 
rented for a modest amount so it will not deteriorate further. His brother lives about 80 
miles from the house and it is a burden to maintain. He hopes to sell it as soon as 
possible. Applicant estimated that even if the house was sold, his portion of the 
proceeds after expenses would be a small part of his net worth.  
 
 All of Applicant’s and his wife’s assets, except his portion of the house noted 
above, are located in the United States. Applicant’s and his wife’s joint assets total 
approximately $7.5 million and he earns a substantial annual salary.15   
 
 Applicant provided letters from two colleagues who have known him personally 
for 5 years and through his work for 25 years. He is described as a well-respected 
national and international expert and has made significant contributions to the U.S. 
Government and the Department of Defense. He is considered professional and 
                                                          
13 Answer to SOR. 
 
14 Answer to SOR. 
 
15 Answer to SOR; AE E. 
 
7 
 
 
commands the respects of his peers. He is described as being straightforward, 
trustworthy, honest, reputable, and ethical. Along with his commitment to the U.S. 
Government and Department of Defense, he is fully committed to training the next 
generation of engineers.16 
 
Israel17 
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy whose prime minister heads the government 
and exercises executive power. The United States and Israel have close bilateral ties 
based on shared democratic values and security interests. They are have participated in 
security dialogues, joint military planning and have collaborated on military research and 
weapons development. Israel has a diversified technologically advanced economy with 
a strong high-tech sector. In recent years, the United States has provided Israel with 
$3.1 billion in security assistance annually. The United States is Israel’s largest trading 
partner.  
 
The government of Israel considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship 
or who have a claim of dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration and other 
legal purposes. 
 
Israel is one of the top collectors of industrial information from the United States. 
It has been repeatedly identified as targeting multiple U.S. Government organizations 
since at least 1997. 
 
The threat of terrorist attacks in Israel is an ongoing concern. Terrorist 
organizations have launched rockets and mortars from the Gaza Strip. The U.S. 
Government has previously issued warnings that American interests could be the focus 
of such terrorist attacks. U.S. citizens, including tourists, students, residents, and U.S. 
mission personnel, have been injured or killed by terrorists while in Israel, the West 
Bank and Gaza. As a result, American citizens have been urged to exercise a high 
degree of caution when visiting places associated with U.S. interests or located near 
U.S. official buildings.  
 
The United States and Israel have developed a close friendship based on 
common democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. There are some 
issues in U.S.–Israeli relations. The United States is concerned with Israeli military sales 
to China; inadequate Israeli protection of U.S. intellectual property; restricted, dual use 
technology has been illegally exported to Israel; and there have been a number of 
espionage-related cases involving Israeli citizens. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
16 AE I and J. 
 
17 HE I and II. 
 
8 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 Applicant possessed an Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
10(a) applied at one point. The acquiring of his Israeli passport while a U.S. citizen 
could raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his 
citizenship of that country. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 In 2001, Applicant had an Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. That 
passport was destroyed at the recommendation of DSS officials. Applicant traveled on 
his U.S. passport to Israel in 2004 and the MOI required him to obtain an exit permit. In 
2005, when he returned to Israel on his U.S. passport for his mother’s funeral, he was 
not permitted to leave the country without obtaining an Israeli passport. He did and 
reported it immediately to his security office upon his return. After much deliberation 
 
10 
 
 
with various government agencies, DSS determined the best way to handle Applicant’s 
dilemma was to have the university’s security office maintain the passport. Applicant 
would only check it out if he traveled to Israel. There is substantial evidence to show 
Applicant followed all of the procedures and guidance given to him by DSS. Applicant 
indicated his willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship but because of the potential 
“red flags” it would raise, DSS preferred the solution they offered. After his hearing, 
Applicant submitted documentation that he has formally applied to renounce his Israeli 
citizenship and surrendered his Israeli passport. All of the above mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant has significant financial interests in the United States. In 2010, he 
divested himself of a bank account he had in Israel. He inherited a part interest with his 
brother in a small house his mother left them. Applicant and his brother would like to sell 
the property, but have been unsuccessful. Applicant’s financial interests in Israel are 
minimal compared to his total net worth. AG ¶ 2(e) does not apply.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”18 
 
Applicant’s wife is a dual citizen of Israel and the United States because she was 
a citizen of Israel before she immigrated. His wife has not had a valid Israeli passport 
since it expired in 2001. She did not apply to have it renewed. In 2004, she was 
provided with an exit waiver when she returned from a trip with her family to Israel. She 
has not applied for an Israeli passport since her return. Applicant’s children were born in 
the United States. They were forced to obtain an Israeli passport to leave Israel in 2004. 
They complied. They have not returned to Israel. They all reside in the United States. 
One child’s passport has expired, and the other two will expire this year. They have not 
used these passports since obtaining them. They all travel on their U.S. passports. 
There is insufficient evidence that Applicant’s contact with his wife and children creates 
a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. There is 
no evidence that any of Applicant’s immediate family members have any significant 
connection to Israel or to a foreign person. In the event, there was a connection, there is 
overwhelming evidence of Applicant’s deep commitment and longstanding relationships 
and loyalty to the United States that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interests. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(c) do not apply to 
Applicant’s immediate family members.  
 
Applicant’s brother, two sisters-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Israel. His brother is a retired military officer. Applicant maintains contact 
with his brother. He has minimal contact with his brother’s wife. Applicant’s wife 
maintains contact with her sister and brother-in-law. Applicant has minimal contact with 
them except through his wife. Israel is a democracy and a close ally. However, it also 
has been victimized by terrorism; restricted, dual use technology has been illegally 
exported to Israel; and there have been a number of espionage-related cases involving 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
12 
 
 
Israeli citizens. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 
7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States.  
 
Applicant and his wife have lived in the United States since 1979. They have 
been naturalized U.S. citizens since 1987. Their three children were born in the United 
States. Applicant has worked with the U.S. Government for more than 32 years and 
held a security clearance for 22 years. He has significant assets in the United States.  
 
 Applicant maintains a relationship with his brother, who retired from the military 
and retired from his insurance job in 2009. His brother’s wife also retired from the 
insurance profession about ten years ago. His brother’s military affiliation was more 
than 30 years ago and it is unlikely to create a risk of foreign exploitation. Applicant’s 
wife maintains a relationship with her sister and brother-in-law. Applicant has minimal 
contact with them. Their positions as the chief executive officer of a private company 
and a nurse do not raise any unusual security concerns or place them in heightened risk 
scenarios. Neither work in high-profile jobs that might be targeted. However, due to the 
nature of Israel’s history of industrial espionage, I cannot find it is unlikely Applicant 
might be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his brother, 
 
13 
 
 
sisters-in-law and brother-in-law and the interests of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) 
does not apply. Applicant has a long history of dedicated work in support of the U.S. 
Government, even before he became a U.S. citizen. His sense of loyalty to the United 
States is deep, and he can be expected to resolve any conflicts in favor of U.S. 
interests. I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply because Applicant’s 
relationship with his brother and his wife’s relationship with her sister and brother-in-law 
are more than casual. Applicant’s relationship with his brother’s wife is casual and AG ¶ 
8(c) applies to her. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has provided his expertise to the U.S. Government for more than 32 
years. He has an impressive record. He complied with the guidance and direction 
provided to him by DSS on how to handle his Israeli passport. He has officially 
renounced his Israeli citizenship and surrendered his Israeli passport. He and his wife 
have made a life for themselves in the United States. His three children were born and 
raised in the United States. Applicant and his wife still have some family in Israel, but 
their contact is unlikely to raise any security concerns. Applicant has part-ownership in a 
house in Israel and when able, intends to sell it. He has substantial assets in the United 
States. He has held a security clearance for more than 22 years and has always been 
diligent in notifying proper authorities when he changed jobs, or transferred control of 
his Israeli passport. He has proved he has deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States. I have considered his demeanor and candor during his 
 
14 
 
 
hearing. I believe in the unlikely event there is a conflict of interest that Applicant would 
resolve it in favor of the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
foreign preference and foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
