 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03058 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
February 25, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct, Alcohol Consumption, and 
Criminal Conduct security concerns. Applicant has been arrested seven times, between 
1990 and 2009, for multiple alcohol-related offenses. He also falsified his e-QIP in 2011. 
While he has abstained from alcohol use since September 2010, not enough time has 
passed to hold that recurrence is unlikely or that doubts concerning his judgment and 
reliability are resolved. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2011, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 7, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct; Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption; and 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 7, 2013. He requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge through his attorney on November 27, 2013. The case was 
assigned to me on January 13, 2014. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on January 15, 2014, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on February 10, 2014. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through T, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant 
requested that the record be left open for additional documentation. On February 14, 
2014, Applicant presented AE U through AE Y. Department Counsel had no objections 
to AE U through AE Y, and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old government contractor. He has worked for his 
employer for 20 years. He was married to his first wife from 1994 to 1996. He married 
his second wife in 2003 and they divorced in 2006. He currently lives with his girlfriend. 
He has no children. (GE 4; Tr. 30-33, 83.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance due to his 
personal conduct, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct. Applicant admitted the 
SOR allegations contained in subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d; 2.a through 2.g; and 3.a 
through 3.b. He denied SOR allegation 1.e. The concerns are set out chronologically, 
below. 
 
Applicant was arrested twice in 1990 for two separate Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI) incidents, as stated in SOR subparagraphs 2.e and 2.f. Applicant 
testified he did not recall the specifics of the first arrest. He testified as a result of his 
first arrest for DUI, his driver’s license was suspended, he was required to attend 12 
weeks of alcohol counseling, and he was required to attend AA meetings. His second 
DUI arrest occurred on October 7, 1990. Applicant was driving on a suspended license 
at that time. He was pulled over for failing to stop at a stop sign, as set forth in the arrest 
report. His Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) was reported to be .221%. Applicant was 
convicted of felony DUI. His sentence included incarceration for six months and parole 
for an unstated period of time. While Applicant was incarcerated, he attended a 
voluntary alcohol counseling program. He testified that he learned in that program that 
alcohol caused his problems. Applicant blamed these DUIs on “being young and dumb.” 
He abstained from drinking for approximately ten years after his incarceration. (GE 1; 
GE 3; GE 6; AE Y; Tr. 33-35, 40, 73-77, 83-85.) 
 
Applicant resumed alcohol use in 2000. When he started drinking again his use 
was moderate. He met his second wife in 2003, and they married three months after 
they met. Applicant testified his wife had a substance abuse problem and that they 
drank together on a daily basis. In 2005 Applicant was arrested and charged with simple 
 
3 
 
assault after arguing with his second wife, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.d. 
Applicant had been consuming alcohol at the time of the argument. Applicant pled guilty 
to the lesser charge of disturbing the peace. He was sentenced to pay a fine, which he 
satisfied. When their relationship terminated in 2006, Applicant’s alcohol consumption 
continued. (Tr. 46-47, 81.) 
 
In the summer of 2006, Applicant was arrested twice for DUI. The first arrest 
occurred in June after he left a sports bar at which he had been consuming alcohol 
alone. Applicant indicated he was sentenced to fines and required to attend alcohol 
awareness classes and attend AA as a result of this charge. The second arrest, alleged 
in SOR subparagraph 1.c, occurred after Applicant left a restaurant near his house. The 
second arrest also included a charge of evading police, because he did not stop for the 
police officer immediately. As a result of these arrests, Applicant was ordered to attend 
one 48-hour in-patient drug-and-alcohol counseling and 16 weeks of outpatient 
counseling, as set out in SOR subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d. He testified he completed 
this court ordered alcohol outpatient counseling in November 2007 to February 2008, as 
stated in SOR subparagraph 2.b.1 Applicant continued to consume alcohol during this 
period. (GE 4; GE 6; Tr. 36, 39-46, 70-73, 77-79, 88.) 
 
In September 2007 Applicant was again arrested and charged with DUI, as 
stated in SOR subparagraph 1.b. The charge was amended to a lesser, unspecified 
misdemeanor. Applicant pled guilty and was sentenced to a fine of $1,525, required to 
complete a “risk reduction program” for 120 days, required to perform 40 hours 
community service, and placed on probation for 12 months. Applicant admitted to 
consuming alcohol before this arrest, but asserted that he was not intoxicated. (GE 5; 
GE 6; Tr. 48, 85-86.)  
 
In March 2009 Applicant was arrested and charged with assault with great bodily 
harm, as stated in SOR subparagraph 1.a. On the night of this incident, Applicant had a 
party at his residence. His girlfriend was intoxicated and was about to try to drive home. 
Applicant tried to stop her and take her keys away from her. The police were called, but 
Applicant departed before they arrived. Applicant was arrested the day after the 
incident. The case was dismissed approximately two months after the incident. 
Applicant admitted to drinking alcohol on this occasion, but claimed he was not 
intoxicated. (GE 6; Tr. 48-50, 82.) 
 
Applicant testified that he last consumed alcohol in September 2010. He blamed 
his 2006 and 2007 DUIs on the difficulties he had dealing with his second divorce 
emotionally. He testified that he received no prognosis during the court-ordered 
counseling sessions. He still has alcohol in his home for his girlfriend’s use. (GE 6; Tr. 
38, 79, 87.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s testimony and reported dates for the outpatient counseling in his e-QIP are inconsistent. His 
e-QIP identified he attended alcohol counseling from December 2006 to April 2007. However, he asserts 
that he only was required to attend this court-ordered program once. He testified that he was not required 
to attend the April 2010 to May 2010 outpatient counseling, as stated in SOR subparagraph 2.a after he 
provided proof he completed the counseling in 2008.  
 
4 
 
On October 5, 2011, Applicant completed the e-QIP. Section 22 of the e-QIP 
inquired into Applicant’s police record through a series of questions, including a 
question that asked, “In the past seven (7) years have you been arrested by any police 
officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement official?” Applicant 
answered this section “Yes” and disclosed he was “[a]rrested for driving while impaired 
twice in the summer of 2006.”  After he disclosed the 2006 arrests, the form asked, “Do 
you have any other offenses where any of the following has happened to you?” and 
again asked, “In the past seven (7) years have you been arrested by any police officer, 
sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement official?”  Applicant marked “No.” 
He failed to disclose his March 2009, September 2007, and September 2005 arrests. 
Additionally, while it was not alleged in the SOR, it should be noted that Applicant also 
failed to disclose his 1990 felony DUI conviction when he was asked “Have you EVER 
been charged with any felony offense?” on the same e-QIP (emphasis in original). 
Applicant testified that his omissions were unintentional and due to oversight or 
confusion on his part. (GE 4; Tr.54-59, 63-70.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by the letters of 
recommendation that attest to the high quality of his character. The letters from 
supervisors, colleagues, and professional contacts reflect that Applicant performs well 
on the job and is a highly valued employee. His employee performance reviews reflect 
he is “exemplary” and “highly effective.” He regularly exceeds the expectations of his 
rating supervisors.  He has received recognition for his exceptional on-the-job efforts in 
articles and through numerous certificates awarded for his work performance. (AE A 
through AE X.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
6 
 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 Applicant was dishonest about the full extent of his criminal conduct. I find he 
deliberately omitted his March 2009, September 2007, and September 2005 arrests on 
his October 2011 e-QIP. The questions concerning his police record are clear and 
unambiguous. He was unable to offer a credible explanation for his omissions. Further, 
his history of criminal incidents and alcohol abuse from 2005 to 2009 reflect poorly on 
his judgment and leave him potentially vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. His omissions and poor personal conduct demonstrate that he lacks the good 
judgment to comply with rules and regulations that are counter to his personal desires. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant failed to present information that he made a prompt, good-faith effort to 
correct his omission of his March 2009, September 2007, and September 2005 arrests 
before he was confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant exhibited a pattern of exercising poor judgment on multiple occasions. 
While he testified that he no longer consumes alcohol, which contributed significantly to 
his lapses in judgment, he relapsed in 2000 after a ten-year period of sobriety. He failed 
to produce sufficient evidence that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur, 
without the passage of more time or other evidence that demonstrates trustworthiness 
and good judgment. Further, he had been sober for almost a year when he intentionally 
falsified his e-QIP. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are not applicable.  
 
7 
 
 Applicant has earned an excellent reputation at work. However, not enough time 
has passed to know whether Applicant could again be tempted to violate laws or other 
rules for his own personal benefit, as he did when he knowingly falsified his e-QIP and 
committed the alcohol-related violations. AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions raised by the evidence are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.     
  
 Applicant was charged with five DUI incidents spanning from 1990 to 2007. He 
also was alleged to have been intoxicated during the 2005 and 2009 physical assault 
incidents. He has received alcohol treatment at least twice, once when he was 
incarcerated in 1991 and again in 2007. However, he chose to continue to consume 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment after his treatment. Applicant has a history of 
making poor decisions after becoming intoxicated. These incidents raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
 
8 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant has a very lengthy history of frequent alcohol abuse, leading to a series 
of criminal charges and other incidents of bad judgment. He previously tried to abstain 
from alcohol for a ten-year period, but resumed abusive consumption. Not enough time 
has passed to determine that Applicant will be successful in his efforts to abstain from 
alcohol use. I cannot hold that recurrence is unlikely or that doubts concerning his 
judgment and reliability are resolved. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant claims sobriety since September 2010, but not enough time has 
passed to establish a pattern of abstinence. He has experienced longer periods of 
abstinence, but resumed drinking alcohol. He is not is participating in a counseling or 
treatment program. He has been to alcohol treatment in the past, but it was 
unsuccessful and he relapsed. He offered no evidence of a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation 
under the terms of AG ¶¶ 23 (b), 23(c), or 23(d). 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could generate a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The condition potentially raised by the evidence is AG ¶ 31: 
 
 (a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses. 
 
 Applicant has been arrested seven times, between 1990 and 2009, for multiple 
criminal offenses including a felony DUI. AG ¶¶ 31(a) is raised by the record.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security 
concerns. They are as follows: 
 
 
9 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s DUIs and assault charges occurred because he has a problem with 
alcohol. As noted above, while Applicant has been sober since September 2010, he has 
not yet demonstrated that future instances of criminal behavior are unlikely to recur. He 
has not yet demonstrated sufficient rehabilitation, nor has sufficient time without 
recurrence passed, given that Applicant’s violations span a 20-year time frame. AG ¶¶ 
32(a) and 32(d) do not apply. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided exceptional 
service to the United States during his employment as a government contractor. He is 
well-respected by those that know him. However, Applicant is a mature individual who is 
accountable for his choices and actions. He built a 20-year-long pattern of alcohol-
related criminal infractions. The potential for exploitation or duress is undiminished, and 
insufficient time has passed since his last arrest in 2009 and last drink in September 
2010 to conclude that recurrence is unlikely. Overall, the record evidence creates 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
 
10 
 
clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
personal conduct, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a-3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
