 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
            )  ISCR Case No. 12-01947 
            ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to provide adequate information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline G for 
alcohol consumption. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 4) He had not previously held eligibility for access to 
classified information. On October 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for alcohol 
consumption under Guideline G. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2013. He admitted the five 
allegations under Guideline G. Applicant requested a decision on the written record. 
(Item 3) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 2, 
2014. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on January 16, 
2014, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely provided additional 
information in response to the FORM on February 16, 2014. The case was assigned to 
me on February 20, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old high school graduate who is working as an air cushion 
vehicle technician for a defense contractor. He studied over three years to be an officer 
in the merchant marine, but he did not complete his schooling. He is not married and 
has no children. He resigned from the merchant marine officer school he was attending 
in 2010 rather than being declared academically ineligible. He felt this permitted him 
some sense of dignity and preserved his decent GPA. Other than the time in school 
studying to be a merchant marine officer where he was concurrently a naval reservist, 
he has no military service. (Item 4, e-QIP, dated October 26, 2011) 
 
Under Guideline G for alcohol consumption, the SOR alleges and Applicant 
admits that from approximately 2006 until May 2013 he consumed alcohol at times to 
the point of intoxication (SOR 1.a); that in October 2009, he was taken to an emergency 
room for acute alcohol poisoning with a blood alcohol content of 0.28 (SOR 1.b); after 
the incident in SOR 1.b, he was advised to seek alcohol counseling and he received 
outpatient alcohol counseling from November 2009 until March 2010 (SOR 1.c); he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent at the completion of the counseling but he continued to 
consume alcohol until at least May 2013 (SOR 1.d); and he was diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent – severe in July 2013 (SOR 1.e). 
 
Applicant admits he started drinking alcohol when he was 17 years old. By the 
age of 20, he was drinking frequently to the point of intoxication. In September 2009, he 
was assigned to a ship as part of his training and education. When the ship was in port, 
he was underage to drink alcohol, but he went alone to a bar and started drinking 
alcohol. He consumed 15 to 20 mixed drinks in about three hours. He passed out and 
was taken to a hospital emergency room. He had a blood alcohol reading of .28. He 
was treated in the hospital for about six hours and did not miss the movement of the 
ship. He reported the incident to both the ship‘s captain and to his academic supervisor. 
(Item 6 at 3) 
 
The school he was attending ordered him to attend alcohol counseling before 
being readmitted to his studies. He received alcohol counseling at a private clinic from 
November 2009 until March 2010. Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent when 
 
3 
 
 
he was released from counseling. He did not drink alcohol from March 2010 until August 
2010. He drank approximately two beers a week and drinking to intoxication about four 
times a year until September 2013. In addition to his full-time employment with the 
defense contractor, he works part time at a club where alcohol is served. As part of his 
security clearance screening, he was again evaluated for alcohol dependency in Jul 
2013. On July 19, 2013, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent – severe. He was still 
consumed alcohol until September 2013. (Item 6 at 4; Item 7, Response to 
Interrogatories, dated October 4, 2013; Item 8, Letter from Counseling Service, dated 
May 14, 2013) 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant states that his last drink of alcohol was on 
September 10, 2013. He attended alcohol counseling for the last four months (October 
2013 until January 2014). He now attends Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings two to 
three times per week. He has not had an alcohol-related incident, such as blackouts or 
legal problems, since 2009. He states he now knows that he is alcohol dependent and 
cannot consume any alcohol. If he had known this earlier, he would not have consumed 
alcohol after completing counseling. He had not appreciated the scope and magnitude 
of the diagnosis of alcohol dependent. (Response to FORM, undated but received at 
DOHA on February 14, 2014)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21) 
  
Applicant drank alcohol to the point of intoxication at times from 2006 until May 
2013. In October 2009, he was taken to an emergency room with acute alcohol 
poisoning and a blood alcohol content of 0.28. He received alcohol counseling from 
November 2009 until March 2010, and was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He 
continued to consume alcohol until at least September 2013. He was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent-severe in July 2013 because of his continued consumption of 
alcohol. Applicant's alcohol consumption and diagnosis are sufficient to raise Alcohol 
Consumption Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from 
work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; AG ¶ 22(e) 
(evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker 
who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program); and AG ¶ 22(f) 
(relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol 
rehabilitation program). 
 
I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23(a) (so much 
time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual 
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of 
action taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if 
 
5 
 
 
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)); and AG ¶ 23(d) (the 
individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation 
along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or licensed 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program). These 
mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents. A determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of an alcohol issue, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant was only 17 years old when he started consuming alcohol. He was still 
a minor and under the legal drinking age when he drank alone and consumed enough 
alcohol to be diagnosed with alcohol poisoning with a blood alcohol level of 0.28. He left 
school, attended counseling, and was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. Even with this 
diagnosis, he still continued to consume alcohol. He drank a few beers per week, 
worked in a club part time, and would drink to the point of intoxication about four times a 
year.  
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant states he has not drank alcohol since 
September 2013. He seems to have matured and understands the dangers of his 
alcohol dependence. He is attending AA meetings on a regular basis. Applicant 
established a pattern of abstinence for only the last five months and has shown 
evidence of some action to overcome his alcohol dependence problems. Applicant 
started drinking alcohol at an early age and had a severe alcohol-related incident away 
from work approximately four years ago. He completed alcohol counseling and was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent, but he continued to consume alcohol, sometimes to 
the point of intoxication. Only in the last five months has he shown signs of maturity and 
abstinence from alcohol consumption 
 
 A significant period of time has not passed without evidence of an alcohol-related 
problem. He continues to work part time in a club, a dangerous environment for 
someone alcohol dependent. Applicant may be on the road to recovery but he has not 
yet demonstrated a change in his circumstances and his conduct does not reflect a 
change in his life. He has not established that he can completely control his alcohol 
consumption impulses as required for someone that is alcohol dependent. The evidence 
does not show that Applicant has yet been reformed or rehabilitated. His history shows 
that he may continue to consume alcohol to excess. I find that Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns for alcohol consumption. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant seems to be on the correct path for recovery. If he continues his 
abstinence from alcohol consumption in the near future, sufficient time may pass with 
evidence of abstinence to resolve the security clearance concerns in favor of granting 
him access to classified information. 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant started drinking alcohol at 
an early age and drank to excess many times from 2006 until 2013. He had an alcohol 
poisoning incident in 2009 and was sent to alcohol counseling. He was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent but still continued to drink alcohol. Only in the last five months has 
he seemed to have matured and stopped his consumption of alcohol. This is insufficient 
to establish a change of life circumstances when considered against his previous history 
of continued alcohol consumption following counseling and diagnosis. Applicant did not 
present sufficient information to establish that he has been rehabilitated and ceased his 
consumption of alcohol. Applicant’s history shows that he is not now reliable and 
trustworthy and has the ability to protect classified information. He may be on the road 
to recovery but he is not there yet. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
7 
 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
