 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 12-02859 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied both allegations under Guideline F. 
The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on November 5, 2013, setting the 
hearing date for November 21, 2013. At the hearing, I admitted five Government 
exhibits into evidence (GE 1-5). Applicant testified and also presented 11 exhibits, 
 
 
 
2 
admitted into evidence as AE A-K. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 2, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After reviewing the pleadings and the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old. He married in 2004, and has one six-year-old child. He 
earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in electrical engineering. He joined his current 
employer, a federal defense contractor, in 2008. He is a quality assurance engineer. He 
received a secret security clearance in 2008 and an interim top secret security 
clearance in 2011. He has held a security clearance without incident for more than five 
years. (GE 1; AE K; Tr. 26-29, 48, 50) 
 
In 2006, Applicant and his wife purchased a residence in State A for $299,000. 
They did not make a down payment, but financed 100% of the purchase price with an 
80% primary loan of $240,000 and a 20% secondary loan of $60,000. Applicant 
estimated his income at the time was $70,000, plus about $9,000 annual gross income 
from his wife’s retail sales position. She was pregnant at the time of the purchase, and 
their daughter was born in March 2007. Complications during the pregnancy required 
hospital care that resulted in approximately $7,000 in medical expenses. In May 2008, 
when Applicant began employment with his current company, his annual income 
increased to $81,000. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 29-35, 48) 
 
In his 2011 security clearance application, Applicant noted that his financial 
situation was affected by the medical debts from his wife’s pregnancy, his daughter’s 
premature birth in 2007, and the resulting complications. It was also affected by his 
wife’s unemployment for four years after the birth, although he testified that this was a 
family decision. He described difficulty in making mortgage payments:  
 
When the housing market crashed, it was no longer feasible for us to 
continue struggling to make payments when the house had lost more than 
half of it’s [sic] value. . .” (GE 1) 
 
However, in his Answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant stated he had no 
difficulty meeting his financial obligations. He stated in his Answer that his mortgage 
payments were “100% on time” and that the funds in his savings and 401(k) at the time 
would have covered approximately 18 months of mortgage payments. He noted, “This 
was not an issue of being incapable of satisfying debt or being overextended 
financially.” (Answer; GE 1; Tr.35) 
 
State A was particularly hard-hit during the economic downturn that began in 
2008. The real estate crisis had a significant negative impact on the market value of 
Applicant’s residence. At the time, Applicant and his wife were considering a move to 
 
 
3 
another state to be near family. Applicant testified, “. . . keeping the house would have 
made that tremendously difficult because I couldn't have sold it, and it wasn't financially 
viable to rent it.” Applicant testified he was in constant communication with the lender to 
request loan modifications. He applied for a modification program in 2009, but the 
lender denied the request because “. . . the amount realized by sale of your property 
following foreclosure exceeds the amount that would be obtained through a modification 
of your mortgage.” In fall 2009, the lender offered Applicant a forbearance plan 
agreement, but it would have increased his monthly mortgage payment by 
approximately $250. Applicant declined. In December 2010, Applicant received a letter 
from the primary lender stating that he did not qualify for the Home Affordable 
Foreclosure Alternative (HAFA) program because “. . . this option is not available at this 
time.” (Answer; GE 2; AE B; Tr. 22, 35-39, 48, 51-52) 
 
Applicant considered other options, including sale and rental. He decided not to 
sell the house because he would have lost approximately $100,000. He did not try to 
rent it because the monthly rent would have been $500 to $700 less than his mortgage 
payment. In July 2010, he consulted an attorney. They discussed a short sale, but his 
attorney advised that, because of “. . . certain loopholes associated with short sales. . .” 
the lender might pursue the deficiency that resulted from a short sale. He also advised 
that other options might be available from the lender if Applicant stopped making his 
mortgage payments. Applicant also sought counsel from a tax advisor. Applicant also 
did “. . . extensive research on a site called youwalkaway.com that helps assists [sic] 
borrowers through the strategic default process.” The website “. . . describe[d] ‘Strategic 
Default’ as an alternative option for those who are drastically under water on their 
mortgages, at no fault of their own.” Both his tax advisor and his attorney advised him to 
“‘walk away’ and allow the house to foreclose (strategic default).”1 In his Answer, 
Applicant stated, “All advice pointed to foreclosure as the best option, as opposed to a 
short sale or waiting for the housing market to come back, which could take decades.” 
Applicant made what he described as a “very difficult decision” to follow his attorney’s 
advice, and allow the loan to become delinquent and go to foreclosure. He stopped 
making his monthly mortgage payments of approximately $2,100 after July 2010. 
Applicant believed that foreclosure was the best financial decision for his family. (GE 2; 
AE D, J; Tr. 35-41, 48-49)  
 
The attorney advised Applicant to consider foreclosure because under State A 
law, the lender could not seek repayment of any deficiency balance following 
foreclosure.2 The attorney helped to “. . . ensure that it would not be possible for the 
lender to attempt to collect the debt after the foreclosure. . .” (AE C, D; Answer; Tr. 31, 
38-41, 44, 49) 
                                                 
1 Strategic default is a financial strategy. It occurs when a borrower chooses to stop paying on a debt or 
obligation even though he or she has the financial means to make the agreed-upon payments. 
 
2 Applicant's attorney submitted a letter citing the State A statutes that would, in his opinion, “not permit a 
lawsuit against [Applicant] for any deficiency on the property. . .” noting that Applicant's property and 
loans met the requirements of the statute. (AE D) 
 
 
 
4 
Applicant and his family moved from the home in November 2010 and rented an 
apartment in State A. The home was foreclosed in December 2010. Applicant testified 
that he reported the foreclosure to his security officer when it occurred. The house sold 
in March 2011 for $157,500. He moved to State B in November 2011, and his wife and 
child followed in February 2012. He has not made any further payments on the State A 
mortgage loans since the foreclosure. He testified he has no intention to pay the debts. 
He has not received an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form 1099-C showing the 
balance on the loans was forgiven. (GE 2, 5; Answer; Tr. 37-41, 43-46) 
 
The only delinquent debts in Applicant’s 2011 and 2013 credit reports are the two 
mortgage loans listed in the SOR, which total $300,000. In 2011, he and his wife earned 
a gross annual income of $103,000, and he had a monthly net remainder (MNR) of 
$2,700. Currently, he earns $106,000 annually. His 2013 personal financial statement 
(PFS) shows $5,506 in net monthly income; he described his spouse’s income as 
“negligible.” His expenses and debt payments totaled $4,506, leaving a MNR of $1,000. 
His only listed monthly debt payment was $306 on an automobile loan. His retirement 
account, college fund, and savings total approximately $130,000. He updated these 
figures in his October 2013 Answer to the SOR, and stated he was debt-free. He paid 
off the car loan. He pays his one credit card in full each month. His retirement account, 
college fund, and savings now total approximately $150,000. (GE 2-4; Answer; AE E; 
Tr. 27, 48) 
 
 Applicant’s rental managers since 2012 provided character references. Both 
noted that Applicant paid his rent timely, and has been responsible in his care of the 
property. His current manager described him as a responsible person with solid 
judgment. A colleague, who is a counterintelligence professional, has worked with 
Applicant daily for two years. He described Applicant as “very respectful of privacy, 
classified information, rules and restrictions.” He considers him to be professional and 
trustworthy. Applicant's industrial security representative, who has known him for 
almost three years, described him as exceptionally focused and hard-working, as well 
as honest and trustworthy. (AE F-I) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, 
commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a 
disqualifying or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an 
applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can 
be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or 
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the 
                                                 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
5 
information presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . 
 
 Applicant purchased a home for $300,000 in 2006, when real estate values 
were rising. He financed 100% of the purchase price. The record contains conflicting 
information about his finances at the time of foreclosure: in his 2011 security clearance 
application, he described himself as struggling to pay the mortgage, but in his 2013 
Answer, he stated he was financially sound, had 18 months of cash reserves, and was 
fully capable of meeting his financial obligations.  
 
                                                 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
6 
 The real estate market crashed in 2008, and Applicant's home value dropped by 
about 50%. Applicant and his wife wished to move to another state, and keeping up the 
payments on the house in State A would have made it financially difficult to move. After 
researching his options and seeking legal advice, he decided in 2010 to pursue a 
strategic default: to stop making payments, even though he was capable of paying, and 
allow the loans to go to foreclosure. The loan was foreclosed in December 2010. The 
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶19 apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant's financial issues are recent and ongoing, because substantial 
mortgage debts remain delinquent. He held a security clearance at the time he decided 
to default on his mortgage loans. His decision to leave a $300,000 debt unpaid raises 
questions about his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Unexpected events affected Applicant's finances. He could not predict the 
difficulties with his wife’s pregnancy, or his child’s premature birth, and the resulting 
medical expenses. However, it appears that these unexpected expenses did not 
severely disrupt Applicant's finances. Moreover, Applicant and his wife decided that 
she would not work outside the home for four years, so it does not fall within AG ¶ 
20(b). The most significant negative event was the 2008 real estate market crash. 
 
 
7 
Applicant could not have foreseen that his property would lose 50% of its value. For 
AG ¶ 20(b) to fully apply, an applicant must act responsibly in response to the 
unforeseen circumstances. Applicant did try to obtain modifications through his lender. 
He also consulted a tax professional and an attorney for advice. Applicant receives 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(c), because although he sought professional guidance, the $300,000 is still unpaid, 
and he has no intent to pay it.  
 
 Applicant’s ultimate decision to “walk away” from his debt does not demonstrate 
a good-faith effort to repay creditors. His attorney advised him that, under State A law, 
the lenders could not demand payment of a deficiency balance after sale of the 
property through foreclosure. Based on that advice, Applicant decided to proceed to 
foreclosure through a strategic default, i.e., to stop making payments on his mortgage 
even though he had the funds to meet his obligation. The Appeal Board has held that, 
even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable under state law, the federal 
government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an 
applicant's conduct in failing to satisfy the debt.7 Under AG ¶ 20(d), “good faith” means 
acting in a way that shows, inter alia, an adherence to duty or obligation.8 Applicant’s 
conscious and deliberate decision not to pay his legitimate financial obligations to his 
lenders does not demonstrate good faith. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
                                                 
7 See e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
 
 
8 
 In assessing Applicant's request for security clearance eligibility under the 
whole-person concept, I considered the positive evidence: his education, his strong 
work performance, and—other than the foreclosure—his good financial record. 
Applicant was responsible in working with the lenders and seeking professional 
financial guidance. 
 
 However, Applicant provided contradictory statements about his financial 
situation during the market crash. In 2011, he described himself as struggling to make 
mortgage payments, but in 2013 he denied having problems and stated he had no 
problem with making the payments and had a large reserve of funds. The contradiction 
raises questions about his credibility. 
 
 As to his mortgage, Applicant chose to deliberately stop paying, despite being 
able to afford it, and he has no intention to pay the $300,000 debt. The lenders’ inability 
to pursue a deficiency balance under state law does not negate the security 
significance of Applicant’s decision to ignore a legitimate debt for his own interests. He 
wished to avoid making payments on a property that was underwater. He wished to 
move his family to another state, which would be difficult to finance if he continued to 
pay the mortgage. He wished to move his family to another state, which would be 
difficult to finance if he continued to pay the mortgage. Security clearance holders are 
held to a high standard. Applicant has held a security clearance for more than five 
years, and was aware of such duties. He was required to consider other factors 
besides whether a strategic default would be financially beneficial. He had an 
obligation to pay his debts, even in hard times. He placed his own interests ahead of 
his duty to honor his financial obligations.  
 
 The evidence at this time fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude he has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
