 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------1  )  ADP Case No. 12-02352 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 28 delinquent debts or accounts, 
totaling $19,751. The only debt that was paid was through the Internal Revenue Service 
intercepting her tax refund. She has a history of delinquent debt and did not make 
sufficient progress resolving her delinquent SOR debts. Financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Her eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2011, Applicant completed her Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of an application for a public trust position (SF 
86). (GE 1) On August 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to 
Applicant (hearing exhibit (HE) 2), pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended, and modified; Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
                                            
1 After Applicant’s divorce became final in December 2013, she reverted to her maiden name. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). (HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Regulation that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position, which entails access to sensitive information. (HE 2) DOD recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such access to sensitive 
information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On October 3, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. (HE 3) On 
November 18, 2013, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed. On 
November 21, 2013, the case was assigned to me. On December 19, 2013, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the 
hearing for January 9, 2014. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled using video 
teleconference. (HE 1)  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits (GE 1-4) (Transcript 
(Tr.) 17-18), and Applicant did not offer any exhibits at her hearing. (Tr. 12) There were 
no objections, and I admitted GE 1-4. (Tr. 18) Additionally, I admitted the SOR, 
response to the SOR, and hearing notice. (HE 1-3) On January 17, 2013, I received the 
transcript. I held the record open until January 30, 2014.  (Tr. 52, 79) On January 30, 
2014, Applicant provided five additional documents, and on February 3, 2014, 
Department Counsel provided Applicant’s documents to me. (AE A-E) They were 
admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted responsibility for the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.c-
1.g, 1.i, 1.q, and 1.u, and she denied responsibility for the other SOR debts. She did not 
provide any corroborating or supporting documentation. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
a “floater” in a medical distribution operations center for 27 months. (Tr. 6-7, 20; GE 1) 
In 2006, she graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) She has not attended college. (Tr. 6-7) 
She has never served in the military. (Tr. 24)   
 
Applicant was married in July 2008 and divorced in December 2013. (Tr. 5, 21) 
Her son is four years old. (Tr. 21) She and her former spouse have joint custody, and 
she does not pay or receive any child support payments. (Tr. 21) Her former spouse 
earns substantially less than Applicant. (Tr. 23-24) Her divorce allocated student loan 
debts to her former husband and two other debts to Applicant. (Tr. 22; AE C, D)   
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her 
December 22, 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview 
                                            
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(PSI), June 8, 2013 responses to DOHA interrogatories, her SOR response, and her 
hearing record. Her OPM PSI, responses to DOHA interrogatories, and her SOR 
response provided specific notice to her of the debts causing security concern and 
provided her ample opportunity to document her efforts to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($166), 1.b ($109), 1.z ($201), and 1aa ($166) were 
owed to a grocery store where Applicant was employed for several months in 2006 and 
2007. (Tr. 24-26) Applicant said her boyfriend stole and forged her checks. (Tr. 26) She 
told the police and her bank about the theft. (Tr. 26-28) She complained to the police in 
2009 or 2010; however, she does not have a police report or documentation from the 
bank showing she disputed her responsibility for the four debts. (Tr. 27-28) She has not 
taken any actions in the last two years to resolve the four debts. (Tr. 29) 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($37), 1.d ($113), 1.e ($170), 1.f ($168), 1.g ($71), and 
1.i ($57) are Applicant’s medical debts. (Tr. 29-30, 32; SOR response) She “assumed” 
the divorce court ordered her former spouse to pay them; however, she was unsure 
about whether or not her assumption was correct. (Tr. 30) She intends to pay these six 
debts. (Tr. 30) 
 
Applicant was the account holder for the cellular telephone debt in SOR ¶ 1.h 
($619), and she accepted responsibility for paying it. (Tr. 31) She did not describe any 
efforts to resolve this debt.   
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($154), 1.k ($90), 1.l ($64), 1.m ($64), 1.n ($55), 1.o 
($100), and 1.p ($75) were from checks written to a grocery store in February to April 
2008. (Tr. 32-33) Applicant said her boyfriend stole and forged the checks. (Tr. 32) She 
was unsure about which forged checks were reported to the police. (Tr. 33) She has not 
attempted to try to pay the checks in the last two years. (Tr. 33) 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.q ($229) is from Applicant’s cable account. (Tr. 34) On 
December 22, 2011, she told an OPM investigator that she intended to pay it with her 
tax refund; however, she used the funds to purchase a vehicle. (Tr. 34) 
      
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.r ($101) is from a returned check written to an oil company. 
(Tr. 34) She did not recognize the debt and believed it might have resulted from a check 
stolen by her boyfriend. (Tr. 35) She did not attempt to contact the creditor that received 
the check to determine their validity, and the check is not paid. (Tr. 35) 
 
Applicant did not recognize the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.s ($437) for an 
account opened in January 2008 or the collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.t ($450). (Tr. 36-37) 
She did not describe any actions to resolve these two debts. 
 
Applicant voluntarily surrendered her vehicle, resulting in the debt in SOR ¶ 1.u 
($12,610). (Tr. 37) Applicant purchased the vehicle in May 2007, lost her employment in 
November 2007, and returned the vehicle about six months after purchasing it. (Tr. 39-
40) She was not employed when she purchased the vehicle, as she was living on Social 
Security disability. (Tr. 39) She was able to purchase the vehicle because her 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
grandmother co-signed on the contract. (Tr. 39) She did not describe any actions to 
resolve this debt. (Tr. 41)   
 
Appellant went to court to challenge a judgment for the medical debt in SOR ¶ 
1.v ($203). (Tr. 41) She believed her medical insurance should have paid the debt; 
however, she was unsure if it was her debt or her former husband’s debt. (Tr. 41-42) 
She did not prove documentation showing resolution of the judgment. (Tr. 42-43) 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.w ($2,721) resulted from a Social Security overpayment. 
(Tr. 43) Applicant said the debt was paid off in 2013. (Tr. 43-44) The SOR indicates the 
debt was in the “Treasury Offset Program,” which intercepts tax refunds to pay federal 
debts. Applicant said her tax refunds were used to make the final payments on the debt. 
(Tr. 44) The Social Security debt was paid in April 2013. (AE B) 
 
Applicant did not recall the bank debt in SOR ¶ 1.x ($342). (Tr. 46) She accepted 
responsibility for the department store credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.y ($112). (Tr. 47)  
She recognized the pizza establishment in SOR ¶ 1.bb ($67); however, she could not 
recall owing the creditor. (Tr. 47) She did not describe any actions to resolve these 
three debts. (Tr. 46-47) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) showed the following monthly 
amounts: gross salary $2,027; net income $1,440; expenses $1,569; debts $0; and net 
remainder negative $129. (GE 4 at 6) Her gross salary subsequently increased to 
$2,069; her net income increased to $1,750; however, she recently purchased a new 
vehicle. (Tr. 48-50) Her largest monthly expenses are her rent payment ($625) and her 
utilities ($372). (Tr. 21; GE 4 at 6) Her taxes are current. (Tr. 45) Applicant planned to 
pay off the delinquent debts on the SOR that were her responsibility. (Tr. 47) 
 
Non-SOR Allegations3 
 
When Applicant was 14 years old, she was diagnosed as having a borderline 
personality disorder. (Tr. 58) She attempted suicide and suffered from depression. (Tr. 
58-59) Eventually she was diagnosed with bipolar disorder, and she suffered from that 
disability for many years. (Tr. 59)  
                                            
3In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five 
circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In 2010, Applicant met with a therapist for her depression about every two weeks 
for at least a year. (Tr. 60) On November 2, 2011, Applicant completed her SF 86, and 
answered “No” to the following question in Section 21: 
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you consulted with a health care professional 
regarding an emotional or mental health condition or were you hospitalized for 
such a condition? Answer “No” if the counseling was for any of the following 
reasons and was not court-ordered:  
 
• strictly marital, family, grief not related to violence by your; or 
• strictly related to adjustments from service in a military combat 
environment. 
 
(GE 1) Applicant conceded that she should have answered, “Yes.” (Tr. 63) She 
explained it was an unintentional error and not a deliberate attempt to conceal her 
mental health treatment. (Tr. 67) She believed that her mental health treatment was 
related to grief and family abuse she received as a child, was not based on violence, 
and was not court-ordered therapy. (Tr. 68-69)4  
 
In August 2013, Applicant attempted suicide by overdosing on her medication, 
and she was hospitalized for two or three weeks. (Tr. 46, 59, 63) She attended 
outpatient therapy on a daily basis for six weeks after her hospitalization. (Tr. 64) She 
believed her memory was affected by the medication. (Tr. 46, 59) She is seeing a 
therapist; however, she has not seen the therapist for several months. (Tr. 59-60) She 
takes her prescribed medication. (Tr. 66) Her current diagnosis is depression and 
bipolar disorder. (Tr. 66) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security and 
has emphasized, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
                                            
4Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add allegations under Guidelines E and I. (Tr. 
69-76) Applicant objected to the amendments. (Tr. 73, 76) Her disclosure of her misdemeanor arrest for 
larceny in 2008 on her SF 86 is an indication that she was not trying to conceal derogatory information 
from security officials. (GE 1, Section 22) Applicant’s erroneous failure to disclose her mental health 
treatment on her SF 86 was based on mistake and not on an intentional attempt to deceive security 
officials. I sustained Applicant’s objections to amendment of the SOR because Applicant has not had 
adequate notice and a full opportunity to collect and present evidence of mitigation regarding these 
allegations. I noted at the hearing that I would consider the information under the whole-person concept. 
(Tr. 77) See note 2, supra. Ultimately I decided to give very little negative weight in the whole-person 
concept to information about her mental health disability. Moreover, Information about her illness provides 
some mitigation as it is a circumstance beyond her control that affected her finances. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-
12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports, her OPM PSI, her responses to DOHA interrogatories, her SOR 
response, and her hearing record. Applicant’s SOR alleges 28 delinquent debts or 
accounts, totaling $19,751. Her largest debt has been delinquent since late 2007. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating 
conditions to all SOR debts. I have credited Applicant with mitigating the Social Security 
overpayment debt in SOR ¶ 1.w ($2,721) because her debt was paid through the 
“Treasury Offset Program,” as the IRS intercepted her income tax refunds.6 She did not 
provide any documentation that she reported the theft of checks to her bank or the 
police. She did not claim to have made any payments to any of the SOR creditors. 
 
Applicant fell behind on her debts because of medical problems (including her 
mental health issues), medical expenses, unemployment, low-paying employment, and 
divorce. She did not describe receipt of any financial counseling. She showed some 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6See ISCR Case No. 08-06059 at 6 (App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2009) (indicating involuntary payment of 
debts through garnishment is not necessarily mitigating). 
   
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
good faith when she admitted responsibility for some of her SOR debts in her SOR 
response and at her hearing.   
 
Applicant has not taken reasonable actions to resolve 27 of 28 delinquent debts 
or accounts, totaling $17,030. She has nine unresolved SOR debts that are less than 
$100, and most are for returned checks. The circumstances beyond her control were 
significant; however, she did not adequately explain why she had not made any 
payments to 27 of her SOR creditors. She did not provide documentation proving that 
she maintained contact with her SOR creditors, and she did not provide any 
documentation showing her attempts to negotiate payment plans with her SOR 
creditors.7 There is insufficient evidence that her financial problem is being resolved and 
is under control. She did not establish her financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of trustworthiness concerns under the 
whole-person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns. Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked 
as a “floater” in a medical distribution operations center for 27 months. In 2006, she 
graduated from high school. She married in July 2008 and divorced in December 2013. 
                                            
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
She has a four-year-old son. She does not pay or receive child support payments. 
Some circumstances beyond her control, such as insufficient income, brief periods of 
unemployment, underemployment, divorce, medical problems, including her mental 
health issues, and medical expenses adversely affected her financial circumstances. 
She has made some progress towards mitigation of financial considerations concerns 
by resolving the Social Security overpayment debt in SOR ¶ 1.w ($2,721).  There is no 
evidence of violations of her public trust position or disloyalty. 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has not taken reasonable actions to resolve 27 of 28 delinquent 
debts or accounts, totaling $17,030. She has nine unresolved SOR debts that are less 
than $100, and most are for returned checks. She failed to prove that she could not 
have made greater progress resolving and documenting resolution of her SOR debts. 
Several debts resulted from either Applicant or her former boyfriend writing checks with 
insufficient funds in her account. If she wrote the bad checks, she should have made 
restitution to the victim-creditors. If her former boyfriend wrote the bad checks, her 
responsible course of action was to report the fraud to the police, her bank, and the 
creditors. She should have provided copies of the police reports to the creditor-victims, 
the banks, the credit reporting companies, and to DOHA. She was unsure about her 
responsibility for several of the SOR debts. She failed to contact several SOR creditors 
about the status of her debts.  
Applicant’s long-term mental health issues raise an additional concern that 
medical problems may have affected her finances and may affect her future ability to 
pay her creditors and maintain her financial responsibility. However, her mental health 
issues are not sufficiently developed to assess their impact on her finances. Even if 
there were no evidence of her mental health issues, the objective fact remains that her 
“[f]ailure or inability to live within [her] means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about [her] reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect [sensitive] information,” and I would still deny her 
access to classified information. See AG ¶ 18.  
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 12968, the Directive, the Regulation, the AGs, and other 
cited references to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I 
conclude more documented progress addressing her debts is necessary before she will 
be eligible to occupy a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.v:   Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Subparagraph 1.w:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.x to 1.bb:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
