 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-11954 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 27, 2012, Applicant submitted her electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86). On January 24, 2013, the Department of Defense issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 8, 2013. Applicant requested 
her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On November 20, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant 
on November 21, 2013. She was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
December 2, 2013. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day 
time allowed that would have expired on January 2, 2014. I received the case 
assignment on February 3, 2014. Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 2.b, 2.c, 2.k, and 2.l, and 
admits the ten other allegations. (Items 2-6)  
 
Applicant is 33 years old. She married an illegal immigrant in 2007 and remains 
married to him. He has a daughter from a prior marriage. Applicant has a child from her 
current marriage. She was on maternity leave until October 2012. Her husband came to 
the United States illegally when he was a teenager. He has resided in this country for 
about 20 years working in the construction industry. Applicant claims her husband 
applied for alien registration in the 1990s but was not successful due to the changing 
laws and regulations. He is currently unemployed. Applicant is the sole income in the 
family. (Items 1, 6-9) 
 
Applicant has 13 delinquent debts totaling $31,213. She has not made payments 
on any of these debts. (Items 1, 4, 6, 9-13) 
 
Applicant owes $177 on a medical account (Subparagraph 2.a). This debt dates 
from 2011. She admits this debt. She has not resolved it. (Items 1, 4, 6, 9-13)  
 
Applicant owes $318 on a telephone bill (Subparagraph 2.b). This debt originated 
in 2011. She denies this debt. However, Applicant’s credit reports from February 2010, 
June 2012, November 2012, and November 2013 show the debt as due and owing. She 
admits in her statement attached to the financial interrogatories that none of her debts 
are paid. Therefore, Applicant owes the money. It is unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 6, 9-13) 
 
Applicant denies owing a cable television provider $439 (Subparagraph 2.c). This 
debt dates from 2011. However, Applicant’s credit reports from February 2010, June 
2012, November 2012, and November 2013 show the debt as due and owing. She 
admits in her statement attached to the financial interrogatories that none of her debts 
are paid. Therefore, Applicant owes the money. This debt is not resolved. (Items 1, 4, 6, 
9-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant owes $468 on a store credit card (Subparagraph 2.d). She admits 
owing this money. This debt is unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 6, 9-13) 
 
Applicant owes $2,433 on a credit card debt (Subparagraph 2.e). She admits this 
debt. She has not resolved it. (Items 1, 4, 6, 9-13) 
 
Applicant owes $2,285 to a debt collector (Subparagraph 2.f). She admits this 
debt but has not paid it. It is unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 7, 9-13) 
 
 Applicant owes a credit card debt of $5,139 to a debt collector (Subparagraph 
2.g). This debt is not paid. Applicant admits this debt. This debt dates from 2008. It is 
unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 7, 9-13) 
 
 Applicant owes $353 on a department store credit card that is being collected by 
a debt collection company (Subparagraph 2.h). She admits this debt. This debt is not 
paid. It dates from 2004. The debt is unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 7, 9-13) 
 
 Applicant owes $2,103 to a medical provider since 2004 (Subparagraph 2.i). She 
admits this debt.  She asserted in her interview with the government investigator that 
she has been paying him $25 monthly since then but did not submit any documentary 
proof of such payments. This debt is unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 7, 9-13) 
 
 Applicant owes $16,127 for a medical procedure done in 2004 (Subparagraph 
2.j). Applicant did not have medical insurance at that time. The hospital wants her to pay 
the bill either in full or on a monthly basis as much as she can. Applicant denies having 
sufficient funds to pay this debt for the last 10 years because of other expenses and her 
husband’s unemployment. She admits the debt but has not resolved it. (Items 1, 4, 7, 9-
13) 
 
 Applicant owes $325 to a cable television provider (Subparagraph 2.k). She 
denies owing this debt. Applicant denies having this provider and cannot find a record of 
her owing this debt. However, Applicant’s credit reports from February 2010, June 2012, 
November 2012, and November 2013 show the debt as due and owing. She admits in 
her statement attached to the financial interrogatories that none of her debts are paid. 
Therefore, Applicant owes the money.  It is unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 7, 9-13) 
 
 Applicant owes $324 to a telephone company (Subparagraph 2.l). She denies 
owing this debt. However, Applicant’s credit reports from February 2010, June 2012, 
November 2012, and November 2013 show the debt as due and owing. She admits in 
her statement attached to the financial interrogatories that none of her debts are paid. 
Therefore, Applicant owes the money.   It is unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 7, 9-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 Finally, Applicant admits owing a $772 debt on a medical procedure 
(Subparagraph 2.m). However, she cannot recall the debt and was supposed to check 
its current status and arrange payment if the debt is valid. Applicant did not provide any 
documents to show she completed that work. The debt is owed and is unresolved. 
(Items 1, 4, 7, 9-13) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed in May to August 2005 and from September 2003 to 
January 2004. These periods without work usually occurred when she was in school to 
obtain job skills or training. (Items 1, 4, 7)  
  
  Applicant did not submit any documentation that she has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of 
her job performance. She submitted no character references or other evidence 
tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to 
evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have 
her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 Applicant married an undocumented foreign national who has resided in the 
United States for at least 20 years. During that time he worked in the construction 
business. Applicant alleges her husband tried to obtain resident alien status but did not 
pursue his application because the U.S. immigration laws and regulations kept 
changing. Her action creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
based on her husband’s illegal immigration status. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s husband violated United States law by entering the country without 
legal permission. He has not obtained legal status in over the 20 years he has lived and 
worked in the United States. AG ¶ 20 (g) applies. 
 
 There are no mitigating conditions applicable to this type of personal conduct on 
the part of Applicant.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 From 2004 to the present, Applicant accumulated 13 delinquent debts, totaling 
$31,213 that remains unpaid or unresolved. Applicant did not submit any documents to 
show she made any effort to repay any of these debts. AG ¶ 19 (a) and ¶ 19 (c) apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on her ability to repay her debts. In the past 12 years, 
Applicant has been unemployed eight months. Her medical procedure in 2004 resulted 
in two substantial debts. Applicant did not repay the debts in the past ten years, nor has 
she attempted to negotiate a settlement with the hospital, so she failed to act 
responsibly under these circumstances to resolve the debts in a timely fashion. She 
failed to meet her burden of proof on that issue. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant married an illegal immigrant to 
the United States, who has been here for at least 20 years and is unemployed. She 
knew his immigration status when she married him. This conduct leaves her vulnerable 
to exploitation, coercion, or duress if she tries to get her husband legal status in the 
United States. Stated another way, she could disclose classified documents to assist 
her husband in obtain legal status in the United States.  
 
Applicant was an adult when she incurred the debts. She has not taken any 
action to resolve her delinquent debts. This inaction leaves her vulnerable to pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress based on the magnitude of her financial obligation. Her 
lack of action continues to this day, and is obviously voluntary. Her inaction will continue 
based on her past performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring 
the debts.  Next, she exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to 
make payments or show proof of any installment agreements to pay any of her 
delinquent debts during at least the past seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under the guideline for 
Personal Conduct. She also did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against 
Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
