 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10278 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 10, 2013, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
November 12, 2013, and reassigned to me on December 11, 2013. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 20, 2013, 
 
2 
 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 28, 2014. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified, but did not offer any exhibits or witness testimony. The record was held open 
for Applicant to submit additional information, but he did not do so. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 6, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c. He denied ¶¶ 1.d - 1.g. The 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a government contractor. He does interior 
construction work at various foreign locations. He is a high school graduate. He is 
married, but currently seeking a divorce, and has two children. He has no military 
experience. He currently holds a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts for a total for all of about $17,430. The 
debts were listed in credit reports from June 2012, and February 2013.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies accrued before he began his federal 
contractor position in December 2011. Some of these debts are related to his 
victimization by identity theft by a relative as more fully explained below. Two debts are 
medically-related for which he believes Medicaid and workers compensation should 
have paid. Specifically, the debts are as follows:3 
 
 The debt alleged in ¶ 1. is a medical debt incurred by Applicant’s wife in the 
amount of $1,022. A February 2013 credit report shows a date of last activity as March 
2010. Applicant admitted this debt, but believed that Medicaid should have paid it. He 
did not provide any documentation to support his claim, or offer any evidence 
concerning his plans to resolve the debt. This debt is unresolved.4  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a delinquent medical debt in the amount of 
$1,683 that Applicant incurred when he suffered the loss of a finger due to a workplace 
accident. The debt is for ambulance service. Applicant admitted this debt, but believed it 
was covered by workers’ compensation coverage. There is evidence showing that he 
was compensated in June 2010 ($1,800) and July 2010 ($300) for his workers’ 
compensation claim. There is no evidence to show that these amounts or any other 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7, 22-23, 35; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 4-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-26, 30-31; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 25; GE 5. 
 
 
3 
 
amount were used to pay this debt. He has not formally disputed this debt. This debt is 
unresolved.5 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c is a collection account in the amount of $1,647. 
Applicant admitted this debt was related to an apartment he leased in 2008. After he 
missed a payment, the debt was sent to a collection service and he did not follow-up on 
it. He has not set up payments for this debt, but indicated he would use this year’s tax 
refund to pay the debt. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.g are delinquent credit card accounts 
($6,165; $1,621; $1,573; and $3,719). Applicant denied these debts claiming that he 
was a victim of identity theft regarding these accounts. He believed his mother opened 
the accounts using his name and information. He submitted an identity-theft affidavit 
that supported his claim. As a result of the affidavit, several delinquent accounts (non-
SOR related) were removed from his credit report and “disputed” notations were made 
on his credit reports concerning the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.g. No 
annotations were made concerning the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.d, and this debt remains 
listed on the February 2013 credit report. The debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.g. 
are resolved, but the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.d is unresolved.7   
 
 Applicant has not received any credit counseling. He testified that he lives “week 
to week” on his paycheck. His personal financial statement shows that after expenses 
he should have about $1,343 in disposable income at the end of the month. He is 
geographically separated from his family, but he provides financial support by insuring 
that half of his pay goes to them.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 25-26; GE 2, 4-5. 
 
6 Tr. at 28-29; GE 3-5. 
 
7 Tr. at 30-33; GE 2-5. 
 
8 Tr. at 35-36; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
5 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Although Applicant and his wife encountered medical care that resulted in two of 
the delinquent debts and could be considered beyond their control, he did not put forth 
responsible efforts to resolve the issues associated with those debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
partially applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling. Additionally, he has not established 
any type of payment plan for the unresolved debts. A promise to pay using his expected 
tax refund does not amount to a good-faith effort to pay the debt. Neither AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
nor 20(d) apply. 
 
 Applicant provided sufficient documentation to support the disputed debts listed 
at SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.g and those debts are resolved in his favor. However, there is 
 
6 
 
insufficient documentation to support the dispute of SOR ¶ 1.d, and it remains 
unresolved. AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a 
concern despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation was 
affected by his medical debts and the fraudulent credit card accounts opened up using 
his name. However, I also considered that despite his these factors, the remaining 
accounts remain unaddressed. His past financial track record reflects a troublesome 
financial history that causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.e – 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
