 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01019 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:                      , Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 23, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR on November 13, 2013, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on January 10, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on January 16, 2014, scheduling the hearing for February 4, 2014. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were 
 
2 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and called a witness, but he 
did not submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information. He submitted documents that were marked Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through G and admitted without objection. E-mail correspondence 
regarding the submission is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 12, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old chief executive officer (CEO) of a defense contractor. 
He seeks to retain his security clearance. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married 
with four children who are teenagers or younger.1 
 
 Applicant owned a small business until 2007, when it merged with another 
company. It still qualifies as a small business for government-contracting purposes. The 
company has faced challenges in the last few years, including federal budget cuts, 
sequestration, and the loss of several contracts. Applicant’s salary from the company 
significantly decreased because of the business downturn. Applicant’s father-in-law and 
one of Applicant’s children had serious medical conditions requiring hospitalization. His 
father-in-law was moved to an assisted-living facility after his hospitalization. Applicant 
did not state that he had extensive medical costs, but he missed an “enormous amount 
of work” and “numerous hours of productivity.” He was unable to pay all his personal 
bills, and several debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts to financial institutions, for $2,936 (SOR 
¶ 1.a); $61,000 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and $15,000 (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant admitted owing the 
debts, and all of the debts appear on at least one credit report.3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $61,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, but he testified 
the debt was opened by his wife without his knowledge, and it is solely in her name. The 
debt is listed by TransUnion on the August 2012 credit report, but it reports that 
Applicant is not the owner of the account and that he is only an authorized user of the 
account. The balance of the debt at that time was $64,257. The June 2013 Equifax 
credit report also lists Applicant as an authorized user of the account. The balance was 
reported as $61,000. Applicant is not personally liable for the debt, but since his wife 
incurred the debt, he feels obligated to pay it. He has been paying $350 per month 
toward the debt for about 18 months.4  
 
 Applicant is repaying a home equity loan that was past due at one time. The 
home equity loan is not alleged in the SOR because he was able to bring it into a 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25, 59-61; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 24-28, 40-50, 62-64; GE 1, 2; AE A-C. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 35-39, 51-55; Applicant’s response to SOR GE 1-5; AE A, G. 
 
3 
 
current status. Applicant has not paid the $2,936 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a or the 
$15,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He plans to start repaying the debts within the next 
few months. He expects to have the debts paid by 2015.5 
 
 The president of Applicant’s company suggested to Applicant that he file 
bankruptcy. Applicant rejected bankruptcy because he feels he has a moral obligation to 
pay his debts. Applicant and his company’s president both testified that their business is 
doing better. They have been awarded new contracts and expect an upsurge in 
business within the next several months. Applicant’s 2013 W-2 form indicates that his 
salary has more than doubled since 2012. He credibly testified that he plans to pay all 
his delinquent debts. He has not received formal financial counseling, but he has 
discussed his finances with his business partner and with several friends and neighbors 
who have expertise in finances.6 
 
 Applicant’s business partner, who is also their company’s president and facility 
security officer, testified to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
honesty.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 50-51, 56-57; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE A, F. 
 
6 Tr. at 28-35, 38, 64-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, D, E. 
 
7 Tr. at 64-69. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or 
unwilling to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s company suffered a business downturn due to federal budget cuts, 
sequestration, and the loss of several contracts. He also had medical problems in his 
family that caused him to miss an “enormous amount of work” and “numerous hours of 
productivity.” Those events were beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) 
also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant has been working to resolve his financial problems. He brought his 
home equity loan current. The evidence does not establish that Applicant is personally 
liable for the $61,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. However, Applicant realizes that it is 
part of his family’s financial responsibilities, and he has been paying $350 toward the 
debt for about 18 months. His business is improving, and it has been awarded some 
new contracts. He credibly testified that he plans to pay all his delinquent debts. He 
plans to start repaying the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c within the next few 
months, and he expects to have the debts paid by 2015.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and made a 
good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
completely applicable because Applicant is still in the process of paying his debts.  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence, the factors that led to his 
financial problems, and his credible testimony that he will address all his financial 
issues. I am convinced he will continue to pay his delinquent debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
