 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 13-00511 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated June 18, 2013, Applicant addressed the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
August 1, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on August 27, 2013, setting the hearing for September 11, 2013. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1-3. They were 
 
 
 
 
2 
accepted without objection. Applicant offered testimony, introduced two witnesses, and 
submitted three files of materials, which were accepted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A1-
7, B1-2, and C1-3 without objection. Applicant was given a week to submit any 
additional materials. On September 16, 2013, the Government forwarded seven files of 
information from Applicant. They were accepted into the record as AX D-J without 
objection. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received on September 19, 2013, 
and the record was closed.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel’s Request for Administrative Notice regarding certain facts 
about the kingdom of Jordan and Gaza was accepted into the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) 1-2 without objection. After the hearing, Applicant submitted supplemental 
information regarding these locales in AX D-J, which were accepted without objection 
and incorporated herein. Administrative notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, § 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). 
 
     JORDAN  
 
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan) is a constitutional monarchy with a 
robust economy and modern infrastructure. Western culture features prominently in the 
lives of many Jordanians. At the same time, traditional Islamic ideals and beliefs provide a 
conservative foundation for the country’s customs, laws, and practices. Relations between 
the United States and Jordan have been close for six decades, with Jordan’s strong 
opposition to terrorism and commitment to peace and stability indirectly assisting wider U.S. 
interests. Despite the se significant ties, the U.S. State Department warns that the threat of 
terrorism remains high in Jordan. Transnational and indigenous terrorist groups have 
demonstrated the capability to plan and implement attacks in Jordan.  
 
Following the death of Osama bin Laden in May 2011, the State Department issued 
a worldwide Travel Alert to all U.S. citizens traveling or residing overseas regarding the 
possibility of enhanced anti-American violence. Travelers to Jordan should be cognizant of 
the fact that Al-Qaida in Iraq affiliates has carried out terrorist activities against both the U.S. 
and Jordanian targets in Jordan. 
 
         GAZA  
 
Following the mobilization of forces along Israel’s border and the outbreak of the 
1967 Six-Day War between a number of Arab states and Israel, Israel seized the West 
Bank, Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem. Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and Gaza 
Strip remains to the present day. In 1994, the Palestinian Authority (PA) was given 
limited self-rule over the West Bank and Gaza Strip, subject to supervening Israeli 
 
 
 
 
3 
control. In 2007, Hamas, a designated Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO), took over 
the Gaza Strip and has exercised de facto control over the territory to the present day. 
The Fatah-led PA exercises limited civil and administrative control over the West Bank. 
However, the division of responsibilities and jurisdictions between the PA and Israel in 
the West Bank is complex and subject to change. On November 29, 2012, the United 
Nations voted to “accord to Palestine non-member observer State status.” The U.S. is 
concerned that this unilateral move by the Palestinians may further impede already 
stalled negotiations over a two-state solution.  
 
The State Department urges U.S. citizens to exercise caution when traveling to 
the West Bank. Several groups operating in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza have been 
designated as FTO, such as Hamas. The threat posed by terrorist groups operating in 
the occupied territories, including the West Bank, is significant. Foreigners, including 
U.S. citizens, have been kidnapped and killed in the past. Many of these groups are 
openly hostile to the United States and U.S. interest. Furthermore, travel to and out of 
the West Bank by U.S. citizens of Palestinian, Arab, or Middle Eastern dissent may 
result in detention and prolonged questioning, without being provided consular access. 
In addition, the State Department reports serious human rights problems throughout the 
occupied territories, to include arbitrary arrest and torture, often with impunity; some of 
which was reportedly committed by PA security forces on detainees. Corruption and 
poverty remain significant problems in the region  
 
 Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old engineer who was granted a fellowship at a United 
States agency in 2012. He was born in the Gaza Strip in the late 1970s. Several months 
later, he was moved by his parents to the United Arab Emirates, where he was raised. 
He came to the United States in 1995 at age 18. He did so to both fulfill a childhood 
dream and undertake post-secondary studies. (Tr. 58) In 1998, during his studies, he 
met his future wife, a naturalized U.S. citizen originally from India. The couple married in 
2001. Applicant’s wife is presently employed by a U.S. defense contractor. Applicant 
received a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. college in 2000, a master’s degree in 2004, 
and a doctorate in 2010. Between the time he was studying for his master’s degree until 
he accepted his present fellowship, Applicant held a number of jobs.  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen when he first became eligible to do so in 2006. 
He has no foreign bank accounts, investments, or assets. He and his wife own a home 
worth about $350,000. They are preparing to purchase a second home. They actively 
vote in national and local elections in the United States. Applicant maintains two 
checking accounts, a savings account, stocks, mutual funds, and retirement accounts in 
the United States, amounting to over $300,000. (Tr. 73-74). He and his wife jointly earn 
about $150,000 a year. Socially, Applicant and his family interact exclusively with fellow 
Americans they know from their work and community. (Tr. 22-23, 39-40) Applicant 
enjoys building projects and spending time with his family, which includes a number of 
outdoor activities with his two children. Like his wife and sons, Applicant is 
“Americanized,” “fully ensconced within everything American.” (Tr. 12, 39). He maintains 
 
 
 
 
4 
no organizational or social ties with the Middle East except those related to his parents 
and siblings. Since coming here in the 1990s as a teen, he has only visited Gaza once, 
in 2001. He has no plans to return. His loyalties are exclusively with the United States. 
(Tr. 80) 
 
 After becoming a United States citizen in 2006, Applicant sponsored his parents 
to join him in the United States. His father worked in the United Arab Emirates as a 
teacher at a private high school, while his mother was a homemaker. Neither has ties to 
a foreign government or military. Applicant’s parents retain legal residency in Gaza 
solely because their younger children in Gaza are minors, need their parents as their 
legal caregivers, and have not yet been granted visas to immigrate to the United States. 
Otherwise, Applicant’s parents maintain U.S. residency, both out of a desire to live here 
and to help them meet the requisites for seeking U.S. citizenship once they are eligible 
to apply for naturalization. (Tr. 62) When in the United States, they live with Applicant, 
who also helps provide them with some financial support when they are here. (Tr. 38) 
When in Gaza, they stay at a house Applicant believes his father shares in ownership 
with members of the father’s family. Applicant believes that his two youngest siblings 
stay there, but he is unsure of his siblings’ living arrangements. (Tr. 60-61) Applicant 
and his parents hope that Applicant’s siblings will immigrate to the United States as their 
visa applications are approved.  
 
 With regard to his siblings in Gaza, Applicant has one older brother, three 
younger brothers, and six younger sisters. At least two siblings are minors. His siblings 
lead low profile lives. Applicant maintains minimal contact with them, sharing about one 
telephonic conversation with them per year, if any. (Tr. 38) He has not seen any of them 
since his sole visit back to the Middle East in 2001. He has not spoken with some 
siblings since 2002, when he spoke to most of his siblings for one or two minutes each 
to solicit information he needed to complete a security clearance application (ie., 
birthdates, children, etc). (Tr. 68) Only one sibling, his older brother, has ever visited the 
United States. (Tr. 26-27, 36-37) He does not know any of his siblings’ birthdays, and 
relies on his parents for details concerning his various siblings. (Tr. 28)  
 
Applicant believes his elder brother works for an American school and his 
younger brothers are similarly working in education or are students. (Tr. 63) He believes 
his sisters are all homemakers, married to men who own shops in the local market. (Tr. 
64) He is not aware of any of them having a connection with a foreign government or 
military. (Tr. 65) He has little in common with his siblings, who now range in age from 
about 15 to 40. Applicant left the family nearly two decades ago, before the youngest 
siblings were born. He has minimal contact with his siblings, and his concentration is on 
his wife, children, profession, and life in the United States. (Tr. 69-71) Applicant’s wife 
described Applicant’s relationship with his siblings as “distant.” (Tr. 38) To Applicant, his 
“family” consists of his wife and sons, “as opposed to the broader picture [to include his] 
parents and siblings.” (Tr. 70) 
 
Along with sponsoring his parents through the immigration process, Applicant is 
currently sponsoring his three youngest siblings for visas. (Tr. 40) Unlike his parents, 
 
 
 
 
5 
who are given priority in terms of visas due to their age, siblings have to “wait in the 
queue, and that could take five years, it could take seven years.” (Tr. 41). Therefore, it 
is unclear when or if these siblings will be able to immigrate to the United States. He 
understands that it may not be possible for any or all of his siblings to immigrate to the 
United States due to quotas. All of Applicant’s siblings wish to immigrate to the United 
States. (Tr. 43, 62) 
 
 Applicant’s parents know that he has had a background investigation, but they do 
not know the purpose for the investigation or any details about his work. His work with a 
U.S. governmental agency takes him to a variety of places, ranging from “the most 
dangerous places [to . . . ] the best places.” (Tr. 82)  His job and personal 
circumstances “don’t attract any attention of foreign . . . intelligence,” he maintains a 
“low profile,” and he has no interest in using social media outlets. (Tr. 30) He has no 
plans to accept assignments in the West Bank or Gaza. (Tr. 83) His siblings know 
nothing of his work. Of his job, Applicant notes that he has unique talents being used by 
his present employer that come to him through both his personal and educational 
experience, as well as his linguistic skills. (See, e.g., Tr. 48) He is known at his job for 
having “outstanding character” and being an exceptional, reliable employee.(Tr. 51; see 
also Exs. A1-7 and B1-2). He is a highly-valued asset to his agency. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
 
 
 
6 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion 
by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7. 
Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the  
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing the information; and 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
AG ¶ 7(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Here, Applicant’s parents maintain citizenship in Jordan. His parents split their 
residency between Gaza and living with Applicant in the United States, while his siblings 
live solely in Gaza. The issue of control over Gaza is complex. It’s presently under the 
de facto control of Hamas, a FTO. Consequently, the above-referenced disqualifying 
conditions apply. Furthermore, special consideration must be given in this case due to 
the heightened risk caused by the risk of terrorism associated with Hamas.  
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.,  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests, and  
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
allegations and he has produced sufficient mitigating evidence.  
 
Here, the primary concern is Applicant’s relationships with his parents and 
siblings. Applicant’s parents are aggressively going through the immigration process to 
become United States citizens. They spend at least half their time in the United States 
with Applicant. They possess but a partial interest in a house in Gaza, which appears to 
be otherwise owned by Applicant’s father’s family. That interest does not appear to be 
essential or an immediately liquid asset, but rather a place for them and their youngest 
children to live while awaiting immigration status into the United States. None of 
Applicant’s extended family are associated with any government, military, or terrorist 
groups, and there is no evidence any of them are involved with the internal tensions 
currently at play in the Gaza and West Bank region.  
While Applicant wishes his siblings well, and is doing what he can to help initiate 
the process for them to immigrate to the United States, their blood ties do not signify 
close or intimate bonds. His immigration to the United  States nearly two decades ago, 
his minimal contact with his siblings, and the broad age range of his siblings 
(approximately 15 to 40) have minimized their familial bonds greatly. In addition, 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant fully appreciates and accepts that his siblings may never become United 
States citizens due to quotas and other factors outside their control.  
 
Meanwhile, Applicant intentionally removed himself from his Middle Eastern roots 
and immigrated to the United States at age 18. He has spent the balance of his life here 
and has embraced his new home. He earned a bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral 
degrees here. He met his wife, married, and had two children in the United States. 
Applicant owns one home, is considering a buying a second home, votes, pays taxes, 
banks, invests, works, and has built both his social and professional lives here. He is 
completely “Americanized.” Other than family, he has no fixed and significant nexus to 
the Middle East. It is clear that Applicant’s primary concerns are with regard to his wife, 
children, work, and the  milieu in which he has thrived for nearly 20 years as a United 
States resident and citizen. While the presence of terrorism in Gaza is a very genuine 
concern, it is notable that there is scant information indicating that either Jordan or Gaza 
manipulates its people in order to target United States citizens or sensitive information. 
It is equally notable that Applicant’s allegiances are clearly with the United States, his 
wife and children, and the stability of their life in the United States. In light of these 
considerations, I find that the aforementioned mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old engineer who was granted his present fellowship by a 
U.S. agency in 2012. Born in Gaza and raised in the United Arab Emirates, he 
immigrated to the United States nearly 20 years ago. Since settling in the United States, 
he has earned bachelor, masters, and doctoral degrees, met his future wife, become a 
United States citizen, married, bought a home, had two children, started a career, saved 
a considerable amount of money, and, as he proudly notes, achieved the American 
Dream. He has only been to Gaza once since becoming a U.S. citizen. In the United 
States, he works, invests, votes, and builds toward a comfortable future. He maintains 
no tangible assets abroad. He has opened his home to his parents as they seek U.S. 
citizenship, and he is willing to sponsor his siblings toward their goal of immigrating to 
the United States. His highly credible testimony clearly indicates, however, that he 
 
 
 
 
9 
maintains only a negligible relationship with his siblings, with whom he maintains 
infrequent contact and of whom he knows very little.  
 
There is no question that terrorism is a concern with Gaza, mainly from the 
influence of Hamas. Hamas, however, does not appear interested in the day-to-day 
activities of the average Gaza resident. There is no reason to suspect Applicant’s family 
abroad is of particular interest to Hamas or a foreign government, or that there is any 
particular interest, now or in the future, in Applicant. Applicant enjoys living a simple, 
low-key life. It is highly unlikely that any of Applicant’s kin could be used as a tool of 
coercion against him. Therefore, I conclude Applicant has mitigated security concerns 
arising under Guideline B.       
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
