  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 13-01189
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his security
clearance to work in the defense industry. The security concerns stemming from his
irregular and limited marijuana use and his one-time misuse of a prescription drug are
sufficiently explained and mitigated. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On or about December 6, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue access to classified
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the1
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which may be identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Department Counsel’s e-mail, dated Jan. 31, 2014. 4
 Exhibit 5. 5
 Exhibit 5 at 30 and 31 of 35.6
 I understand that Adderall is a potent amphetamine psychostimulant and pharmaceutical drug commonly7
used in the treatment of ADHD and narcolepsy. 
2
action under the security guideline known as Guideline H for drug involvement.
Applicant answered the SOR on December 17, 2013. Neither Applicant nor Department
Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.2
Thereafter, on January 22, 2014, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and
material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant3
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it January 31, 2014. He then
notified Department Counsel he would not reply to the FORM and requested an
expedited decision.  The case was assigned to me February 5, 2014.   4
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 23-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security clearance
for the first time. He has never married and he has no children. He earned a bachelor’s
degree from a large state university, which he attended  during 2009–2013. Like many
recent college graduates, he is currently living with his parents.
Applicant is now working as an entry-level engineer with a federal contractor. As
part of his employment, he completed a security clearance application in June 2013.5
He disclosed the following matters in response to Question 23 of the application:6
• Using marijuana about ten times during September 2007 to March 2013, when
he was 16 to 22 years of age; and
• Misusing a prescription drug (Adderall)  once in July 2012.7
He explained that he had no intention to use any illegal drugs now that he had a career
and other responsibilities. He further explained that he misused Adderall in order to stay
awake after a work day. Other than his drug abuse, he reported no other matters of a
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
3
security concern (e.g., financial problems, alcohol-related incidents, or police record) in
his application.
The SOR alleged the drug abuse as described above. Applicant admitted the
allegations in his answer to the SOR. Concerning marijuana use, he stated that he was
not a regular or consistent user of marijuana and his usage was not significant.
Concerning misuse of Adderall, he stated that it was not recent (July 2012) and it was
an isolated incident. He also pledged that he will not use any illegal drug or misuse a
legal drug in the future.  
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶¶ 24–26 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 19
 AG ¶ 24(b). 20
 AG ¶ 25(a).  21
 AG ¶ 26(a)–(d).22
4
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline H,  the security concern is that the use of an illegal drug, or19
misuse of a prescription drug, raises questions about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. In this context, the term drug abuse means “the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from the approved medical
direction.”  The guideline also expresses a concern that drug involvement may call into20
question a person’s ability or willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations.
Here, the evidence is sufficient to establish a security concern based on
Applicant’s history of drug abuse.  The evidence shows he engaged in drug abuse by21
using marijuana about ten times while in high school and college. During the same
period, he misused a prescription drug on one occasion. His drug abuse reflects
negatively on his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to follow laws,
rules, and regulations.   
There are four mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline H.  In light of22
the evidence here, AG ¶ 26(b) is most pertinent because I am persuaded that Applicant
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).23
5
has demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in the future. I reach that conclusion
for the following reasons: (1) his misuse of Adderall was a one-time isolated incident; (2)
his use of marijuana (ten times while in high school and college) was irregular and
limited; (3) he has not engaged in drug abuse since March 2013, which was before
completing college and before beginning his job with a federal contractor; and (4) he
has pledged, in both his security clearance application and his answer to the SOR, that
he will not engage in drug abuse in the future. In addition, he receives credit for
disclosing his drug abuse in his security clearance application and during the security
clearance process. By doing so, he did what is expected of a person seeking access to
classified information. In summary, viewing the evidence as a whole, I am persuaded
that his drug abuse has ended and it will not occur again. 
Applicant’s history of drug abuse does not justify current doubt about his
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In
reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept.  I also weighed the23
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude he has met his ultimate
burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.   
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
