The Government submitted 14 items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 13-00080
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On July 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated October 28, 2013.  Applicant received the FORM on November1
6, 2013. He timely submitted additional information. I received the case assignment on
January 29, 2014. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant has not mitigated
the security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
In August 2010, Applicant reapplied for a security clearance but did not provide sufficient information for      2
consideration. (Item 7)
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F,
¶¶ 1.a through 1.o., with explanations.  (Item 4) 
Applicant is 28 years old. He is a technical writer employed by a defense
contractor. Applicant graduated from high school and attended some college, but did
not obtain a university degree. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 2003
until 2007, receiving an honorable discharge. Applicant held a security clearance in
2003, but was denied a security clearance in 2012.  Applicant married his second wife2
in May 2012. He has no children. (Item 5) Applicant has been employed with his current
employer since February 2010. On March 6, 2013, he completed a security clearance
application. (Item 5) 
 The SOR lists 15 delinquent debts totaling about $27,730.00. (Item 1) The
Government concedes that the debt in allegation 1.g is paid and confirmed by
documentation and credit report. (Item 12)
Applicant explained that he has taken responsibility for his credit and past debts.
When the debts were outstanding, he made payments to some companies. However,
when a company wanted an amount that he could not afford, it remained unpaid. He
stated that he was also taking responsibility for the debts of his ex-wife. He stated that
his medical bills are the result of a May 2010 accident that was not his fault. In addition,
he was unemployed from July 2007 to January 2008, but he received unemployment
benefits during that time. He intends to pay his debts when final amounts have been
established. (Answer to FORM)
Applicant provided documentation with his response to the FORM which
supports that the following debts are paid or settled: SOR 1.d ($1,505); 1.e ($881); 1.f
($84); 1.h ($790); 1.i ($746); 1.l ($776); and 1.m ($156). The documentation did not
provide details for each settlement amount, but these accounts have been resolved.
(Answer to FORM)
. 
With respect to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant claims that this collection account
in the amount of $10,923 has been disputed since 2007. He claims that he purchased a
vehicle but did not receive the car.  He tried to pursue a claim for fraud but was not
successful. He notes that the debt will no longer be an issue due to the statute of
limitation in 2013. He did not submit any documentation concerning a resolution of the
debt.
Applicant disputed the debt in SOR 1.b ($2,301). He presented a 2013 Experian
credit report that confirmed the debt for this account has been deleted.  
3
The alleged debt in SOR 1.c ($1,650) is the result of a 2010 automobile
accident. Applicant stated that he settled the case in December 2013 and plans to
make arrangements to pay the settlement amount. He did not provide any
documentation to support this claim.
Applicant claimed that the debt in SOR 1.j ($197) is another medical account
from an accident. He stated that it has been paid by the insurance company, He
submitted an invoice for the debt which shows that it has a balance of $194. 
The debt alleged in SOR 1.k ($105) is another medical account from the
accident. Applicant stated that the bill was paid, but did not submit any documentation
to support the claim. 
The debts alleged in SOR 1.n ($825) and 1.o ($1,480) are additional medical
accounts resulting from this accident. He states that they have been paid by his
insurance but did not submit any documentation.
Applicant believes that the medical accounts that were on SOR should not be
held against him because they were beyond his control from an accident that was not
his fault. He stated that he waited until the insurance company had settled the case.
However, he dis not provide any information or documentation concerning the accident
or the insurance settlements. 
Applicant states that he can live within his means.  He has an annual household
income of about $88,000. He estimates that his total household expenses are about
$30,000 per year. He has veterans’ benefits of $7,200 to $18,000 depending on the
number of classes for which he is enrolled. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
4
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
5
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports establish his delinquent debts. His
credit reports confirm these debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
since 2003 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has
a significant amount of delinquent debt despite payments on some accounts. The
delinquent obligations remain. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not
apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant did not provide information to prove that the delinquencies
were beyond his control and that he acted responsibly. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has failed to provide
documentation to show that he has a plan for the remaining delinquent debts. He also
relies on the statute of limitations for the vehicle debt. While this may absolve him of a
legal obligation, he did not show that he attempted to address the debt earlier. He did
not present evidence that he received financial counseling. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem) does not apply. I find
that  there are not clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and
are under control. He has not met his burden of proof.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 28 years old. He has worked for his current employer since 2011.  He
served in the military. Applicant held a security clearance in 2003, but was denied his
clearance in 2012. He did not supply sufficient information on his application concerning
his financial situation for the application to be processed.  
He was unemployed and had medical accounts that were the result of an
accident but he did not explain the nexus between the debts and his situation. Applicant
has paid some of his debts. He has not shown significant progress or plans for the
other debts. His pattern of financial irresponsibility and his failure to take immediate
action to resolve his debts does not show good judgment or reliability.  Applicant has
not mitigated his case. 
The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials. A denial of his security clearance does
not necessarily indicate anything adverse about an applicant’s character or loyalty. It
means that the individual has presented insufficient mitigation to meet the strict
standards controlling access to classified information. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d-i: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.j-k: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.l-m: For Applicant
7
Subparagraphs 1.n-o: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
