 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00319 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brian Conway, Personal Representative 
 
 
February 25, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 12 delinquent debts totaling $1,414,874, identified on the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). Applicant repaid one small debt and is making payments 
on his tax debts. Applicant failed to mitigate the remaining delinquent accounts. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
June 14, 2013. On October 29, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on December 2, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on January 21, 2014. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on January 21, 2014, scheduling a hearing for February 
10, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 14, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf, called one witness, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted into the record without objection. Applicant requested that the record be left 
open to allow him to submit additional evidence and his request was granted. On 
February 18, 2014, Applicant presented additional exhibits, marked AE C through AE H. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE C through AE H, and they were admitted 
into the record. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on February 19, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He is divorced and has no children. He has worked for 
a government contractor since 2002 and seeks a security clearance in connection with 
that employment. He possesses a bachelor’s degree. (GE 6.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 12 delinquent debts totaling $1,414,874. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted all of the debts as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l. (Answer; GE 7; GE 9; GE 12; GE 14.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to his decision to invest in three 
real estate properties and the subsequent decline in the real estate market. Applicant 
purchased his first investment property in 2004 for $400,000. He put 5% down, and 
financed the rest through two loans: a first mortgage of $322,0001 and a second 
mortgage of approximately $50,000.2 In 2006, he purchased a second investment 
property for approximately $450,000. He put 5% down, and financed the rest through 
two loans: a first mortgage of $396,0003 and a second mortgage of approximately 
$50,000. He also purchased a third property, his personal residence, in 2006. He 
bought it for approximately $500,000. He put 5% of the purchase price down, and 
financed the rest through two loans: a first mortgage of $437,0004 and a second of 
approximately $57,000.5 All of Applicant’s mortgages were “interest only, five-year 
balloon types.” (GE 8; GE 10; GE 14; AE H; Tr. 35-49, 51, 59-63, 73-83.) 
 
                                                          
1 Alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.i. 
2 Applicant was unable to discern to which investment property the second mortgages alleged in SOR 
subparagraphs 1.d and 1.j pertained. 
3 Alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. 
4 Alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g. 
5 Alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.k. 
 
3 
 
Applicant rented out the first property. However, his tenant vacated the property 
shortly after he purchased his third property in 2006. At that time, Applicant was listed 
the properties for sale but the real estate market crashed. He owed more on each of the 
mortgages than the properties were worth and was unable to short-sell the properties. 
He attempted to use credit cards to make ends meet during this time. In December 
2007 Applicant’s first property was foreclosed upon. By the end of 2008, the mortgage 
holders on each of the three first mortgages had foreclosed upon the secured 
properties. The second mortgages all remain outstanding. Applicant testified that he 
intends to contact the second mortgage holders and repay these debts, but that he 
currently does not have the financial resources to address those debts at the current 
time. (GE 8; GE 10; GE 11; GE 14; AE H; Tr. 59-63, 73-83.) 
 
Appellant is alleged to be indebted on two Federal tax liens in the amounts of 
$19,081 and $51,513, respectively.6 Applicant testified that as his properties were 
foreclosed upon, he failed to adjust his federal tax withholdings. This resulted in unpaid 
tax delinquencies for tax years 2008, 2009, and 2010. He presented documentation that 
shows he has an installment agreement to repay his back taxes. Applicant initially 
entered into an installment agreement with the IRS to repay $1,870 per month until his 
debt was satisfied. He struggled to meet his payments and requested that the 
repayment plan be modified. Applicant documented that he made monthly payments of 
$900 beginning February 2013 through January 2014. His payments were set to 
increase to $1,000 per month on February 20, 2014.  He currently owes approximately 
$70,000 on his delinquent tax obligations. He hopes to have it repaid by 2016, when he 
will be able to address some of this other delinquent accounts. (GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; GE 
10; GE 11; GE 14; AE A; AE B; AE E; Tr. 51-56, 64, 68, 81-83.) 
 
In addition to Applicant’s tax debt and real estate debt, he has four other past 
due accounts identified on the SOR including: a utility debt of $100;7 a credit card debt 
of $11,705;8 a delinquent telephone bill of $455;9 and a second delinquent credit card 
totaling $18,041.10 Applicant repaid the $100 utility bill on February 10, 2014, as 
documented in printouts of online statements. For the phone bill, he presented a 
cancelled check that shows he made a payment of $80.34 on September 22, 2012. He 
indicated that this creditor is requesting $200 to settle the debt. He failed to produce 
documentation that he paid the $200 requested to satisfy the phone bill. The other two 
accounts remain outstanding. (GE 7; GE 9; GE 2; GE 14; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE F; Tr. 
56-59, 62-67, 70-72.) 
 
Applicant testified that he earns approximately $175,000 per year. His personal 
financial statement completed February 8, 2014, shows he has a monthly remainder of 
$1,139. He testified that he has addressed two other delinquent debts that he was able 
to settle for less than the amount owed. He hoped to reach settlements with his 
remaining creditors after he repays his tax debt. He estimated that it will be three to five 
                                                          
6 As stated in SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. 
7 As stated in SOR subparagraphs 1.c. 
8 As stated in SOR subparagraphs 1.f. 
9 As stated in SOR subparagraphs 1.h. 
10 As stated in SOR subparagraphs 1.l. 
 
4 
 
years before he settles all of his debts. He has had no formal financial counseling. (AE 
A; AE H; Tr. 63-64, 68.) 
 
Applicant is respected for his honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity by his 
professional contacts. His performance appraisals reflect he is a valued employee. (AE 
G; Tr. 35-49.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $1,414,874 in delinquent 
debt. The debts have been delinquent since 2007 and 2008. While Applicant satisfied 
the utility debt for $100, and he is making payments on his tax delinquencies, in its 
entirety, the Government has established its prima facie case against Applicant. The 
evidence shows Applicant’s “inability or unwillingness to satisfy” his second mortgages, 
phone bills and credit card debt. He has an overall “history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, but found inapplicable, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 In this case, the economic downturn in the real estate market, an event beyond 
Applicant’s control, contributed to his financial difficulties. He has addressed two debts 
not listed on the SOR, satisfied the $100 debt listed in 1.c, and is making payments on 
his tax debts in 1.a and 1.b. These actions show some responsibility in addressing his 
delinquencies. He no longer has financial liabilities for the three first mortgages that 
were foreclosed upon by the lenders. However, he has a significant monthly remainder 
that is not currently being applied toward his remaining delinquent debts. He was unable 
to articulate why he had waited until the week prior to the hearing to pay off the small 
$100 utility debt. He failed to produce proof he satisfied the relatively small delinquent 
phone bill. He has no concrete plan to address his remaining delinquencies, other than 
to wait until his tax debts are resolved, despite his significant monthly remainder. While 
Applicant receives some credit for the mitigating evidence in the record, it is not 
sufficient to overcome the concerns raised by his conduct. 
 
The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”11 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.” 12 
Applicant’s ongoing decision not to address his remaining debt in a meaningful manner 
reflects poorly on his current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. I cannot find that financial problems are unlikely to recur. He has 
not established that the problem is being resolved or is under control, or that he made a 
good faith effort to repay his remaining delinquent accounts. None of the mitigating 
conditions were sufficiently established by the record evidence with respect to that debt 
and the financial history of which it is symptomatic. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
12 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
7 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking and dedicated employee who performs well on the 
job. While he has recently repaid his small utility debt, made a single payment on his 
phone bill in 2012, and has an on-going repayment agreement to satisfy his delinquent 
taxes, he failed to produce sufficient documentation that his remaining delinquent debts 
have been addressed or are otherwise being satisfied in a responsible manner. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
