1
                                                           
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00827
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On September 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on January 15, 2014, scheduling the hearing by video
teleconference  for February 6, 2014. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into
evidence, without objection. Applicant testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX)
A-K, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open for additional
submissions which the Applicant timely provided. The submission was entered into the
record without objection as AX L. The transcript (Tr.) was received on February 18,
2014. The record closed on February 14, 2014.  Based on a review of the pleadings,
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), with explanations.
Applicant is a 39-year-old defense contractor. Applicant graduated from high
school in 1992 and attended college courses but did not obtain a degree. He has been
with his current employer since January 2013. (GX 1) This is his first request for a
security clearance. Applicant was removed from his position in March 2013, due to the
security clearance issue. (Tr. 30)
Applicant married in 2001. He and his wife have four children. His wife returned
to work in December 2010, and she was the primary wage earner. Applicant remained
at home with the children. Before that time, he had worked for ten years with a defense
contractor. (GX 2) Applicant’s wife earned considerably less than Applicant. The rate of
income decreased from $16 an hour to $10 an hour.  They could not maintain their daily
expenses. Applicant and his wife attempted to obtain a home equity loan, but they were
denied. (Tr. 29) Applicant consulted an attorney regarding bankruptcy, but Applicant did
not agree with that solution. He wanted to consolidate his debts. In January 2012,
Applicant obtained the services of a debt consolidation company, received financial
counseling, and initiated monthly payments to resolve his debt. (Tr. 29, AX L) The
plan’s goal was that Applicant fulfill his financial obligations within a 42 month period.
(GX 2) He sends $963 each month to the  consolidation company. (AX J)
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts, including collection accounts and a
charged-off account, totaling approximately $45,200. The Government stipulated that
the debt alleged in 1.a is the same as the debt alleged in 1.f, and at the hearing
withdrew 1.f. Applicant presented documentation for several other non-SOR debts that
have been paid. (AX F, G, H, I )
The account alleged in SOR 1.a for $3,409 has been settled for $1,704.
Applicant made 12 payments of $142. He made his last payment on January 31, 2014.
(AX E)
.
The  account in the amount of $31,368 alleged in SOR 1.b is included in the debt
consolidation plan. Automatic debits are made from his checking account. (Tr. 50)
Applicant presented documentation to confirm that this account is included in the debt
consolidation schedule. (AX L) He is current with his monthly payments of $963. This
account is the result of a loan that was made in 2010. (Tr.54)
The  past-due account alleged in SOR 1.c for approximately $5,072 is paid.
Applicant provided information that the account was settled for $2,614. The final
monthly payment of $261 was made and there is a zero balance. (AX A) He has no
other accounts with this bank.
3
The past-due account alleged in SOR 1.d for approximately $2,873 has been
settled for $785. Applicant started making a monthly payment of $100 in February
2012. (AX B)
A charged-off account alleged in SOR 1.e for approximately $2,517 was settled
for $1,133. (AX C, D) In November 2013, Applicant started his monthly payments of
$50. The account will be settled in full by October 2014. (Tr. 16)
Applicant earned about $17 an hour in his position before he had to stop in
March 2013, due to the security clearance issues. His wife earns about $12 an hour at
her current job. Applicant and his wife use a budget.  He estimates that after expenses
and debt repayment, he has approximately $259 net monthly remainder. He has no
new debt. When he returns to his position, the income will increase greatly. Applicant
has approximately $125,000 in real estate assets. He saves money each month.
Applicant submitted a post-hearing submission, which embodies his family budget. (AX
L) He reduced monthly expenses by cancelling internet service and dropped his land
line telephone service.
Applicant presented a letter of reference from a former employer. (AX K) He is
described as a diligent and conscientious worker. His former employer noted that in ten
years, Applicant never had a violation of any kind. He highly recommends Applicant.
 Applicant is involved in the community with coaching. He volunteers for various
charitable organizations. (Tr.55)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
      Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations
Applicant acknowledges that he has delinquent debts. His credit reports confirm
the debts. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems began when his wife returned to work and he
resigned from his employment in 2010. He remained home with the children during that
time. However, his wife’s income was not sufficient to maintain the expenses. He
attempted to obtain a home equity loan and a loan from his bank. This was not
successful. He was proactive in resolving his debts.  He did not ignore his creditors.  In
January 2012, Applicant obtained the services of a debt consolidation group. He
received financial counseling. He has consistently made a monthly payment of $963 to
the company. He has included the SOR debts in the plan. He expects that the plan will
take 42 months to complete. When he returns to work, he will attempt to shorten the
6
time.  Applicant has acted responsibly. He also paid several non-SOR debts. In sum,
Applicant made good-faith efforts to resolve and address the financial issues. Applicant
received financial counseling and uses a budget.  He has earned  credit under  AG ¶¶
20(a), (b), (c) and (d).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 39-year-old professional with a long history of employment in the defense
arena. He is recommended by his former employer. 
Applicant has paid several debts that are not alleged on the SOR. He also paid
three SOR debts. He produced documentation that proves his assertion. Applicant
incurred the delinquent debt as a result of his wife returning to work in 2010 as the
primary and sole wage earner for the family. When financial difficulties started,
Applicant attempted to get a loan from his bank, or in the alternative a home equity
loan. That was not successful. He paid the bills that he could. He found full employment
in 2013 and by that time he had entered into a loan consolidation plan. He has been
consistent with payment to the plan. Several debts have been paid. Applicant’s gainful
employment will allow him to shorten the payment time for the plan. He has met his
burden to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
Applicant was candid at the hearing. He acted reasonably under the
circumstances. I have no doubts or reservations about Applicant’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Clearance is granted. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: WITHDRAWN
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
