 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 13-00977 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 12, 2013. On 
September 23, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 30, 2013; answered it on October 19, 
2013; and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. On November 13, 
2013, Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel’s request is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) II. (HX I 
is discussed in the below discussion of administrative notice). Department Counsel was 
 
2 
 
ready to proceed on December 20, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on January 
2, 2014. On December 31, 2013, Department Counsel contacted Applicant by email and 
she agreed to a hearing date of January 15, 2014. On the same day, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for 
January 15, 2014. On January 6, 2014, DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing, 
changing the hearing venue to another courtroom in the same city. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
G, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until January 31, 2014, 
to enable her to submit additional documentary evidence. She timely submitted AX H 
through L, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments 
regarding AX H through L are attached to the record as HX III. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on January 30, 2014. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Morocco. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as 
HX I. I took administrative notice as requested. The facts administratively noticed are 
set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old linguist employed by defense contractors since March 
2010. She was deployed to Iraq from March 2010 to September 2011, was unemployed 
from September 2011 to August 2012, was hired by another defense contractor in 
August 2012, and is currently deployed to Kuwait. She received an interim security 
clearance in April 2010 and held it during her deployment to Iraq. (Tr. 67.) 
 
 Applicant was born in Morocco. She married a Moroccan citizen in April 2000. 
She was 17 years old and had not completed high school when she came to the United 
States in October 2000 with her then spouse, looking for “a better life.” (Tr. 28.) She 
divorced in July 2005.  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in June 2006. She married her current husband 
in March 2008. Her current husband is a native of Morocco who is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. She and her husband have a five-year-old daughter, who is a U.S. citizen but 
lives in Morocco with Applicant’s mother while she is deployed. (Tr. 38.) Her daughter 
attends daycare but does not go to school in Morocco. (Tr. 42.) Her daughter speaks 
Arabic and “a little bit of English.” (Tr. 76.) Applicant closed her bank account in 
Morocco and sends money for the care of her daughter by Western Union. (Tr. 44.) 
Applicant visited her mother and daughter in Morocco for about two weeks in December 
2012 and December 2013. (Tr. 56.)  
 
3 
 
As a result of coming to the United States as a teenager, Applicant’s friends all 
are in the United States. She testified that she thinks in English rather than Arabic. She 
regards the United States as her country and her home. (Tr. 30.) 
 
 Applicant completed cosmetology school in December 2003 and worked for 
several years as a hair dresser. (Tr. 28.) In March 2010, she was hired by a defense 
contractor as an Arabic linguist and deployed to Iraq, where she worked with an 
intelligence unit. Her description of her duties was restricted at the hearing because it 
was classified. She accompanied troops in the field, wore a military uniform, a Kevlar 
helmet, and body armor. She did not carry a weapon but received weapons training. 
She experienced an attack on her unit’s compound and has been under hostile file while 
“outside the wire.” (Tr. 72-74.)  
 
Applicant received three “challenge coins” from her unit because of her 
outstanding performance under combat conditions. The specific circumstances under 
which she earned the coins are classified. (Tr. 64.) Photocopies of the coins are at AX 
J. The transcript does not reflect her demeanor during the hearing, when she submitted 
the coins as evidence. She held each in her hand, touched it gently, was silent for a 
moment, and then submitted it in evidence. When I returned each coin to her, she again 
treated it with the same gesture of affection.  
 
 Applicant described her feelings when she returned from Iraq. She testified, 
 
It’s not—it wasn’t easy for me to be there and see what I’ve seen and go 
through whatever I went through, but yet, it just like stays in me. I felt like a 
patriot. I felt like I am doing something for this country. . . . The feeling of 
serving with the Army just – it’s like tingling. I feel butterflies. I feel like I’m 
there. 
 
(Tr. 29.) 
 
 Applicant stayed home with her husband and daughter for about a year after her 
Iraq experience, “recovering” from her experience. She then volunteered to serve in 
Kuwait. She testified, “I missed doing what I was doing. I love what I do and I’m good at 
it.” She is now working with U.S. forces, training Kuwaiti forces. (Tr. 67-69.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents divorced in the 1990s, and each remarried and had children. 
(Tr. 46-47.) As a result, Applicant has a large extended family. Applicant’s mother, 
father, stepmother, stepfather, father-in-law, mother-in-law, two brothers, two 
stepbrothers, two stepsisters, two half-brothers, and three half-sisters are citizens and 
residents of Morocco. She has one half-brother who is a citizen and resident of France. 
(GX 2.) She has no siblings in the United States. (Tr. 40.) 
 
 Applicant has daily telephone contact with her mother, who cares for Applicant’s 
daughter while she is deployed. (Tr. 41-42.) Their daughter stays with Applicant’s 
mother because her husband is a clothing store manager, working 12-hour days, and is 
 
4 
 
unable to adequately care for their daughter. (Tr. 38.) Applicant has sponsored her 
mother for an immigrant visa to the United States. (AX K.)  
 
Applicant’s contact with her father, a retired electrician, and her stepmother is 
limited to yearly holiday greetings. (Tr. 47-48.) She talks to her older brother, who owns 
an electrical company, about once a month. (Tr. 49.) She talks to her younger brother, a 
lawyer in the Ministry of Interior for Morocco, about twice a week. (Tr. 52.) 
 
About once a month, Applicant talks to her stepfather, a vegetable wholesaler, 
and her two half-sisters and one half-brother, who are students and live with her mother. 
(Tr. 43-44, 53; GX 2.) About once a year, she talks to with her oldest half-sister and 
oldest half-brother, who are students, and her stepsisters and stepbrothers. She has 
yearly contact with her father-in-law, a retired Moroccan customs agent; her mother-in-
law, a housewife; and her two brothers-in-law, one of whom is a restaurant chef and the 
other a taxi driver. (Tr. 60-61; GX 2.) She has no contact with her former parents-in-law. 
(Tr. 57.) 
 
An Army chief warrant officer (W-2), serving as the chief of human intelligence 
operations for a task force in Iraq, submitted a letter on Applicant’s behalf. He stated 
that Applicant’s performance “always outperformed expectations.” She displayed a high 
level of maturity and a constant desire to improve her skills. She was ready to go on 
missions “outside the wire” with little or no notice. Her understanding of the language 
and the “minute nuances” of local culture was an “unmatched quality in the Human 
Intelligence profession.” (AX A.) In addition to the challenge coins given to her by her 
immediate supervisors, she received a certificate of appreciation from the brigade 
commander. (AX B.) 
 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor in Kuwait also submitted a letter. He stated that 
Applicant works in harsh and unpleasant conditions, where she operates and lives “just 
like every deployed soldier in the region.” She always performs “above and beyond” to 
support the mission. Her supervisor describes her as “dependable, reliable, hard-
working, conscientious, honest, peace-loving, courteous, and trustworthy.” (AX I.) A 
coworker in Kuwait describes her as “a stellar performer.” (AX H.) Another coworker 
states, “The natural interpreter that she is, and the resilient person that I have come to 
know her to be, she spares no effort in bridging the gap between our soldiers and the 
host countrymen, in addition to showing no signs of weakness when it comes to dealing 
with the hazardous and austere working and living conditions we have had to deal with.” 
(AX L.) 
 
 Morocco is a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral parliament and an 
independent judiciary. There is a potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests 
and citizens in Morocco. The Moroccan authorities aggressively disrupt groups targeting 
U.S. or Western-affiliated and Moroccan government agencies. The terrorist threat in 
Morocco stems largely from numerous small, independent, violent extremist cells that 
are isolated from each other and limited in both capabilities and international 
connections. Morocco and the United States work closely on counterterrorism efforts. 
 
5 
 
Morocco has a comprehensive counterterrorism program of vigilant security measures, 
regional and international cooperation, and counter-radicalism policies. Morocco has a 
three-pillar strategy to counter violent extremism: (1) a law-and-order approach, working 
closely with the United States and other international and regional partners to 
strengthen its security and counterterrorism capabilities; (2) accelerated education and 
development initiatives for youth and expanded legal rights and empowerment of 
women; and (3) a national strategy to confirm and institutionalize Morocco’s widespread 
adherence to the Maliki school of Islam.  
 
 Morocco is a major non-NATO ally of the United States. It is a member of several 
regional and international organizations that combat money laundering and financing of 
terrorist organizations. It cooperates with European and African partners by sharing 
information, conducting joint operations, and participating in activities to increase their 
military and civilian capabilities.  
 
 Morocco’s most significant human rights problems are lack of citizens’ right to 
change the constitutional provisions establishing a monarchical government, corruption 
in all branches of government, and widespread disregard for the rule of law by security 
forces. A revised constitution was adopted in July 2011, but there has been little or no 
progress passing the laws necessary to implement the constitutional changes. 
However, elections in November 2011 were considered by international and domestic 
observers to be credible and relatively free from irregularities. Crime in Morocco is a 
serious concern, particularly with respect to aggressive panhandling, pick-pocketing, 
purse-snatching, thefts from occupied vehicles stopped in traffic, and harassment of 
women.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
6 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that the following members of Applicant’s family are citizens 
and residents of Morocco: her mother (¶ 1.a), father (¶ 1.b), stepmother (¶ 1.c), 
stepfather (¶ 1.d), two brothers (¶ 1.e), two stepbrothers (¶ 1.f), two stepsisters (¶ 1.g), 
two half-brothers (¶ 1.h), three half-sisters (¶ 1.i), father-in-law and mother-in-law (¶ 
1.k). It also alleges that she has a half-brother who is a citizen and resident of France (¶ 
1.j). 
 
 
7 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
 
8 
 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Morocco is an ally of the United States and a strong partner in combating 
terrorism. Although terrorist groups have attempted to make inroads into Morocco, they 
have remained small, disorganized, and without significant capabilities or international 
connections, due in large part to the aggressive and effective actions of Moroccan 
authorities. Human rights violations are a problem, especially in the areas of 
government corruption and abuse of authority by security forces. Crime is a problem, 
especially in large cities, but it consists mostly of property crimes, i.e., pickpocketing, 
purse-snatching and the like. The administrative notice materials submitted by 
Department Counsel do not reflect any Moroccan efforts to target the United States for 
military or economic espionage, nor do they reflect concerns about kidnapping or killing 
U.S. citizens by Moroccan authorities or terrorist groups to obtain sensitive military 
information. 
 
 When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 
01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts 
with an immediate family member in a foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 
00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
It is not necessary for the Government to prove affirmatively that a country 
specifically targets U.S. citizens in order to raise Guideline B security concerns. ISCR 
Case No. 08-09211 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2010). Furthermore, factors such as the family 
members’ obscurity or the failure of foreign authorities to contact them in the past do not 
provide a meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s circumstances post a security 
risk. ISCR Case No. 07-13696 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009). 
 
 Applicant has close ties of affection and obligation to her mother and her 
daughter. Her ties to her extended family of stepbrothers, stepsisters, half-brothers, and 
half-sisters are less strong, but she nevertheless has feelings of obligation toward them. 
 
 The presence in Morocco of small, disorganized terrorist groups with limited 
international connections is not sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” under AG ¶ 
7(a) or the potential for a conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b). Terrorism is a threat to all 
countries, including the United States, as demonstrated by the recent Boston Marathon 
bombing. However, the abuses by some Moroccan security forces and corruption in the 
Moroccan government establish a heightened risk of attempts to coerce or influence 
Applicant through her immediate family members, especially her mother and her 
daughter, and a potential conflict of interests between the interests of her family and the 
interests of the United States. The evidence showing a heightened risk and potential 
 
9 
 
conflict of interest is not strong. However, mindful of my obligation to resolve doubt in 
favor of national security, I am satisfied that it is sufficient to establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b). 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 For the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), I 
conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. However, I am satisfied that AG ¶ 8(b) is 
established by Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
United States. While holding an interim clearance, Applicant demonstrated her 
trustworthiness and devotion to the United States while serving under combat 
conditions in Iraq, participating in classified operations, and providing significant 
contributions to national security. During the hearing, she avoided talking specifically 
about her actions in Iraq, even though they were significant, stressful, and frightening.  
 
 Most acts of heroism among military combatants are motivated by an intense 
sense of loyalty and obligation to fellow combatants rather than a more abstract sense 
of loyalty to country. Applicant’s demonstrations of loyalty and affection for the U.S. 
forces with whom she served were obvious and impressive. 
 
Generally, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security procedures and 
regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative value for the purposes of 
refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security concerns raised by that applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying circumstances. However, where an applicant has established 
by credible, independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures 
and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which 
the applicant made a significant contribution to the national security, such 
circumstances give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he or she will recognize, 
resist, and report a foreign power or terrorist’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. In 
this case, Applicant has a track record of complying with security regulations and 
 
10 
 
procedures in high-risk circumstances in which she made significant contributions to 
national security. See ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 19, 2008); ISCR 
Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008). Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is 
established. 
 
 Applicant has frequent contact with her mother, daughter, and brothers; less 
frequent contact with her stepfather, half-sisters, and half-brothers; and annual contact 
with her father, older half-brother, one half-sister, and her half-brother who lives in 
France. There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family 
member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 1, 2002). Applicant has not rebutted this presumption for her contacts with her 
mother, stepfather, brothers, and the half-sisters and half-brothers who reside with her 
mother and stepfather. However, AG ¶ 8(c) is established for those family members with 
whom she has only annual contact.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was sincere, intense, and credible at the hearing. She has put her life 
on the line for U.S. military personnel and distinguished herself as a linguist under 
combat conditions. After spending a year recovering from the stress of her experience 
in Iraq, she volunteered to serve in Kuwait, where she is now serving under austere 
circumstances. She is passionately dedicated to the United States, its values, and its 
national security.  
 
 
11 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude she 
has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
