1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------ )
aka ------------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 13-00510
aka ------------------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his security
clearance to work in the defense industry. He did not present sufficient evidence to
overcome the security concerns stemming from his unresolved criminal conduct, his
problematic personal conduct, and his illegal drug use while possessing a security
clearance. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On or about July 2, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue access to classified
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which may be identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal Board4
restated existing caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
2
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the1
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline J for criminal conduct,
Guideline E for personal conduct, Guideline H for drug involvement, and Guideline B for
foreign preference.    
Applicant answered the SOR on August 12, 2013. Neither Applicant nor
Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the
written record.2
Thereafter, on November 14, 2013, Department Counsel submitted all relevant
and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of3
relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it December 16, 2013.
He replied to the FORM with a one-page memorandum within the 30-day period allowed
under the Directive. The case was assigned to me January 17, 2013.  
Ruling on Evidence
Exhibit 7 is a report of investigation from the background investigation of
Applicant. The three-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant on
February 22, 2013. Under the rules that govern these cases, a report of investigation
may be received and considered as evidence when it is authenticated by a witness.4
Exhibit 7 is not authenticated in any way, and so, it is not admissible.    
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance
previously granted to him by the Defense Department. His relevant employment history
consists of (1) working as an interpreter for a federal contractor during 2009–2010, (2)
working as a linguist for a second federal contractor during 2010–2012, (3) a period of
unemployment of less than one year during 2012–2013, and (4) working as a linguist for
a third and current federal contractor since February 2013. All three jobs required
 In light of these facts and circumstances, the foreign influence concern under Guideline B is decided for5
Applicant, and it will not be discussed further. 
 Exhibit 5. 6
 Exhibit 17. 7
3
Applicant to live and work in Afghanistan in support of the U.S. military. He has never
married and has no children. 
  
Applicant is a native of Afghanistan. He and his immediate family left Afghanistan
and relocated to Pakistan in about 1998. They lived there until about 2001, when they
immigrated to the United States as refugees. He obtained U.S. citizenship in January
2009. His father is now deceased, but his mother and four siblings are U.S. residents
and citizens. 
In addition to his immediate family members, the SOR alleges, under Guideline B
for foreign influence, that Applicant has contact with two people who are residents in
and citizens of Afghanistan. The first is his sister-in-law who was a resident in and a
citizen of Afghanistan, but she is now lawfully residing in the United States with her
husband, Applicant’s brother. The second is a fellow linguist Applicant met in
Afghanistan working in support of the U.S. military. Applicant has limited work-related
contact with him, and has no further relationship with him.5
Within a year of obtaining U.S. citizenship, Applicant began working for the first
federal contractor. He applied for and obtained a security clearance. As part of that
process, he completed counterintelligence-focused security screening in September
2009.  He held that job from September 2009 to May 2010 when he left for what he6
viewed as mismanagement by the contractor. 
Applicant began working for the second federal contractor in June 2010 and
remained there until March 2012. About one year into the second job, in June 2011, an
Army major e-mailed Applicant’s supervisors notifying them that she was terminating his
work for that military unit.  The e-mail’s subject line was “We are firing [Applicant],” and7
it set forth multiple reasons:
1. Attempting to conduct human-intelligence operations without authorization. 
2. Substandard or unimpressive translation skills.
3. Avoiding work and tardiness.
4. Claiming to be a former Marine scout/sniper, which was untrue.
5. Telling Afghans he was a member of the U.S. Special Forces, which was untrue.
 Exhibit 17 at 2. 8
 Exhibit 6. 9
 Exhibits 3 and 4; response to FORM. 10
 Exhibit 3. 11
 Exhibit 4. 12
 Exhibit 4 at 5–6. 13
 Exhibit 4 at 11.14
4
6. Suspected of smoking hashish, although drug use was not confirmed by
eyewitness or testing.
Applicant remained employed with the second federal contractor until March
2012. A business record from his employer, entitled Exit Interview, states that he
resigned his position for personal reasons on March 14, 2012, and returned to the
continental United States the next day.  Another business record from his employer,8
entitled Termination Report, dated March 16, 2012, states that his contract-end date
was March 6, 2012, and his last day at work was March 15, 2012. It further states that
his status was unfavorable and noted the following relevant remarks: (1) he was fired by
a military unit for operational security violations, poor translation, and poor attitude; (2)
he was then transferred to complete his contract; and (3) he was not to be rehired.  
Applicant was then unemployed until February 2013, when he began his current
job for the third federal contractor. While unemployed, he was arrested and charged
with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in November 2012.  Applicant maintains9
the DUI was dismissed.  He did not provide a court record or other record to support10
his claim of dismissal. 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application on February 5, 2013.  He11
disclosed the 2012 DUI in response to Question 22 about his police record. He did not
disclose the unfavorable circumstances surrounding his employment with the second
federal contractor in response to Question 13C about his employment record. He
replied in the negative to Question 23 about illegal drug use or drug activity.  
About two weeks later on February 19, 2013, Applicant underwent
counterintelligence-focused security screening.  He reported the DUI and stated it was12
dismissed.  Concerning illegal drug usage, he stated that he had never used illegal13
drugs for personal use, but he also stated that he used hashish once in January 2010
while on a mission with the U.S. military.  He explained that he took three or four puffs14
of a cigarette wrapped in hashish to ensure operational security and completion of the
intelligence-collection mission. He stated that he did not reveal this incident in his
security clearance application because the usage for was operational reasons only. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to15
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 23
5
Applicant now denies using hashish in January 2010. In both his answer to the
SOR and his response to the FORM, he claims he was misunderstood during the 2013
counterintelligence screening. He further explained that a third-party (nonmilitary
personnel) was smoking hashish in their presence, and he was smoking a regular
cigarette. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As15
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt16
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An17
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  18
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting19
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An20
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate21
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme22
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.23
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).24
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.25
 AG ¶ 31(c).26
 AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(c), and 16(d).27
6
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.24
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it25
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
1. The criminal conduct allegation
The 2012 DUI arrest and charge are disqualifying under the criminal conduct
guideline.  Without reliable documentary evidence to support his assertion, I cannot26
find that the DUI was dismissed or otherwise resolved in his favor. Accordingly, the
unresolved DUI raises a legitimate concern about his security suitability, which he has
not mitigated. 
2. The personal conduct allegations
The unresolved 2012 DUI, the inappropriate workplace behavior while employed
with the second federal contractor, and the three falsifications of his 2013 security
clearance application are disqualifying under the personal conduct guideline.  The27
negative implications of the unresolved DUI, alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a, are discussed above
and will not be repeated here. The other matters are discussed below.
SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that in March 2012 Applicant was terminated from his
employment with the second federal contractor due to operational security violations,
poor translations, and poor attitude. That allegation is a misreading of the evidence, but
it is not a material variance that requires amending the SOR along with notice to
Applicant and an opportunity to respond. The business records from the second federal
contractor show that Applicant fulfilled the terms of his contract, which terminated or
 Exhibit 17 at 1–3. 28
 Exhibit 3 at 20 of 51. 29
7
ended in March 2012.  The name of the document, Termination Report, is simply the28
nomenclature used by the company to record an employee’s departure under favorable,
unfavorable, or derogatory circumstances. In Applicant’s case, it was unfavorable. The
business records also note, in the past tense, that he was fired by a U.S. military unit for
operational security violations, poor translations, and poor attitude, and he was then
transferred to another entity to complete his contract. The reasons for the action were
explained in detail in the June 2011 e-mail from the Army major. 
Those records establish that Applicant engaged in inappropriate workplace
behavior that raises a legitimate concern about his security suitability. His denials, as
explained in his answer to the SOR and his response to the FORM, are not persuasive.
Other than his bare assertions, he did not present any documentary evidence to support
or corroborate his denials.  
SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d, and 2.e allege that Applicant falsified his 2013 security
clearance application when answering questions about his employment record and
illegal drug use. He denies the allegations. In light of the facts and circumstances here,
including no opportunity to listen to Applicant’s testimony and observe his demeanor, I
conclude Applicant knowingly and willfully gave false answers in response to three
questions on his security clearance application.
His denial to Question 13C about his employment history was false because he
was required to disclose the unfavorable circumstances of his employment with the
second federal contractor. Question 13C is a five-part question, and the relevant parts
are:  
• Have you left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of
misconduct? 
• Left a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance?29
The business records establish Applicant left his job with the second federal contractor,
albeit upon completion of the contract in 2012, following allegations of misconduct and
unsatisfactory performance, as detailed in the June 2011 e-mail from the Army major.
The timing of the allegations (2011) and when he left the job (2012) is not determinative,
conclusive, or dispositive on the question if he was required to report the unfavorable
circumstances. No doubt, Applicant did not disclose the unfavorable circumstances
because he knew they could have a negative effect on his ability to maintain a security
clearance and his employment.   
In addition, Applicant’s denials to Question 23 (another multi-part question)
about illegal drug use are false. In deciding this issue, I have relied on the 2013
 Exhibit 4. 30
 See Fed.R.Evid. 803(6) and 803(8). 31
 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(g). 32
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).33
8
counterintelligence document.  It is a business record or official record or both,  and it30 31
is the type of document that reasonable people rely on when making important
decisions in the Defense Department and the U.S. military. As such, it is considered
reliable information. Applicant’s denial of hashish use in January 2010, although not
wholly improbable, is not sufficient to rebut or overcome the unequivocal information
recorded in the counterintelligence document that establishes he used hashish in
January 2010. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant knowingly and willfully gave false
answers in response to Question 23 when he failed to report illegal drug use within the
last seven years as well as illegal drug use while possessing a security clearance.  
To summarize the personal conduct, Applicant’s 2012 DUI is unresolved, he
engaged in inappropriate workplace behavior while employed by the second federal
contractor, and he gave false answers in response to three questions on his 2013
security clearance application. I have considered the seven mitigating conditions under
Guideline E, and none, individually or in combination, are sufficient to mitigate the
security concern. The 2012 DUI appears to be an isolated incident, but it is unresolved.
He also engaged in highly inappropriate workplace behavior as detailed in the June
2011 e-mail from the Army major. His behavior is probative of unreliability,
untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. And he made false statements during the
security clearance process, which is serious misconduct that is not easily explained
away, excused, or mitigated.
3. The illegal drug use allegation 
SOR ¶ 3.a alleges that Applicant used hashish in January 2010 while possessing
a security clearance and while on a mission with the U.S. military deployed overseas.
This matter was discussed above and resolved against Applicant. It is serious
misconduct and raises a security concern.  Given his denial, he is not credited with32
evidence of reform and rehabilitation. 
4. The whole-person concept
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,  I conclude Applicant did not present33
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the security concerns stemming
from his unresolved criminal conduct, his problematic personal conduct, and his illegal
drug use while possessing a security clearance. In reaching this conclusion, I gave
substantial weight to Applicant’s employment in support of the U.S. military in
Afghanistan, which is a high-risk job in a dangerous place. Nonetheless, the negative
 AG ¶ 2(a).34
9
implications of his misconduct militate against a conclusion that Applicant “is an
acceptable security risk.”  Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of34
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline H: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 4.a–4.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.     
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
