 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00772 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (Item 3). On September 10, 2013, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after 
September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him.  
 
 Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on October 4, 2013, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 4, 
2013. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 14 Items 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(Items 1-14), was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.   
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on November 12, 2013, and returned it to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). In response to the FORM, he timely submitted a document that I marked as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and admitted into the record without objection from 
Department Counsel. DOHA assigned the case to me on December 12, 2013. 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Pakistan. (FORM). He provided nine supporting documents to show detail and context 
for those facts (Items 6-14). Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and I 
granted Department Counsel’s request.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004), and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and 2.a 
through 2.c. (Item 2.) His admissions, including those made in his March 2013 
Counterintelligence Focused Security Screening Questionnaire and Interview, are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Items 2, 4.)  
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan in 1987 and is 27 years old. He attended high 
school there. In September 2006 he immigrated to the United States as a child of a U.S. 
permanent resident. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2012. He has a 
current U.S. passport that will expire in 2022. He lost his Pakistani passport that will 
expire in 2014. (Items 4, 5.) 
 
After arriving in the United States, Applicant attended a university for a couple 
semesters. He worked as a cashier from October 2006 to September 2009. He then 
drove a taxicab until February 2013, when he obtained a position with a defense 
contractor, working as a linguist with the U.S. Army in a Middle Eastern country. (Items 
4, 5.) He stated in his response to the FORM that on September 26, 2013, while on a 
mission with the Army, his team was ambushed by the Taliban, who shot at their truck 
numerous times with a machine gun. (AE A.)   
 
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Pakistan. He has two siblings who were born in 
Pakistan. His father immigrated to the United States in 1991. Sometime later, 
Applicant’s mother, sister, and brother immigrated to the United States through his 
father’s sponsorship, and prior to the time Applicant immigrated. (AE A.) All three of 
those family members have become naturalized U.S. citizens. Another sister and 
brother were born in the United States. His sister, who was born in Pakistan, is on 
active duty with the U.S. Army. She works as a linguist for the Army in the Middle East. 
(Item 4; AE A.)   
 
Applicant’s paternal grandparents were born in Pakistan. His grandmother was a 
citizen and resident until her death in June 2013. His elderly grandfather remains a 
citizen and resident. He lived with those grandparents before immigrating to the United 
States. (AE A.) In February 2013 Applicant indicated that he contacted his grandparents 
twice a month while his grandmother was alive. (Item 4.) In his November 2013 
response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he calls his grandfather twice a year, at 
the holidays. From 2007 until her death in June 2013, Applicant sent his grandmother 
$300 a month to help support family members. (Item 4; AE A.) 
 
Applicant’s paternal uncle and four aunts are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
He contacts his aunts once or twice a month, and his uncle three times a year. 
Applicant’s maternal grandparents were born in Pakistan, but are now residents of 
Germany. (AE A; Item 4.) Applicant has a friend who is a citizen and resident of 
Pakistan. He contacts his friend twice a month. (Item 5.) 
 
 On February 25, 2013, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. Subsequently, the 
Government alleged that he intentionally falsified answers to three questions on the e-
QIP. Applicant denied that he falsified answers to the said questions on the e-Quip. 
(Item 2; AE 1.) 
 
 In response to “Section 19 – Foreign Contacts,” of the e-QIP, Applicant failed to 
disclose his grandparents, uncle, four aunts, and friend all of whom were citizens and 
residents of Pakistan. He listed his parents and siblings. Applicant explained that he did 
not understand the question and made a mistake. (AE A.) He noted, however, that he 
disclosed in the e-QIP that he lived with his grandparents before moving to the United 
States. (Id.) In supplemental documents within the Counterintelligence Focused 
Security Screening Questionnaire, prepared on February 25, 2013, and March 10, 
2013, he listed numerous foreign relatives and friends, with whom he had contact, 
including his grandparents, other relatives, and friends. (Item 4.) 
  
 In response to “Section 20A – Foreign Financial Interest – Foreign National 
Support,” of the e-QIP, Applicant failed to disclose that he was providing $300 monthly 
to his grandmother in Pakistan for family support. During an interview with a 
government investigator in March 2013, Applicant stated that he was sending money to 
his grandmother since 2006 or 2007. He said he did not disclose that information in his 
e-QIP because he did not know that he was required to do so. (Item 5 at 2.) In his 
October 2013 Answer to the SOR, he explained that he did not disclose it because “It 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
was considered very immaterial amount, paid as some sort of charity to my Grand-
Mother. Therefore, I could not consider it while updating the final copy of SF-86. I sent 
this money through Western Union and there is no other reason to hide such 
information (Sic).” (Item 2.) He restated that answer in his November 2013 response to 
the FORM. (AE A.) 
 
 In response to “Section 26 – Financial Record – Delinquency Involving 
Enforcement,” of the e-QIP, Applicant failed to disclose that a tax lien was filed against 
him in 2010 for failing to pay taxes on a food vendor license. Said lien was released as 
paid in January 2012. Applicant was unaware that this unpaid tax for a vendor’s license 
became a tax lien until he reviewed his credit report in conjunction with applying for a 
security clearance in 2013. He stated that he never used the license, and hence did not 
pay the quarterly fees. After learning of the debt, he paid the fee. (Item 5 at 4.)  
 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted 
no character references describing his judgment, morality, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability.  
 
Pakistan 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents (FORM) concerning Pakistan, which are incorporated herein by reference. 
Of particular significance are Pakistan’s history of political unrest, and the presence of 
the Taliban and al-Qaeda, terrorist organizations, which continue to assert power and 
intimidation within the country and the bordering country of Afghanistan. Safety and 
security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target United States 
interests in Pakistan and in Afghanistan by suicide operations, bombings, 
assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this time, the risk of 
terrorist activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains 
poor and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of 
State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other 
Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. Few sections of Pakistan are safe or 
immune from violence, and the government has difficulty enforcing the rule of law.  
 
Policies 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere circumstance of close family ties with a family member living in 
Pakistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or is a 
known terrorist haven. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places a 
significant, but not insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate 
that his relationships with his family members living in Pakistan do not pose a security 
risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist family members living in 
Pakistan.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Pakistan has an enormous problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with his grandfather, uncle, three aunts, and a friend 
living in Pakistan creates a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist those family 
members in Pakistan by providing sensitive or classified information. His relationship 
with his grandmother no longer poses a concern. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.   
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns in this case 
are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. After leaving Pakistan, Applicant 
maintained regular contact with his grandfather, uncle, aunts, and a friend, who are 
citizens and residents of Pakistan. He also maintained contact with his grandmother 
until her recent death, and provided her some financial support for over six years. While 
his loyalty and connections to his family members in Pakistan are positive character 
traits, for security clearance purposes, those connections negate the possibility of 
mitigation under either mitigating condition in this case. Although Applicant has been 
working for the Army for a period of time, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to fully 
meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his 
relatives who are Pakistani citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has some application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
established some connections to the United States. In 2006 he immigrated to the United 
States and joined other family members here. In July 2012, albeit less than two years 
ago, he became a U.S. citizen. His parents and four siblings are U.S. citizens and 
residents. He began working in the United States after arriving in 2006. He has been 
working with the U.S. Army in the Middle East since February 2013. There is no 
evidence that he owns real estate or significant personal property in the United States. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c that Applicant deliberately 
falsified answers to questions on his February 2013 e-QIP, by failing to disclose 
information relevant to foreign contacts, foreign national support, and a financial 
delinquency. The Government contended that these falsifications constituted potential 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not disclose the adverse information about 
all three matters, but denied that he intentionally misled the Government regarding 
them. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does 
not establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time the omission occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 
2004)). 
Applicant’s explanation that he did not intentionally fail to disclose all of his 
foreign contacts in Pakistan is credible. He disclosed his previous residence with his 
grandparents in Pakistan in the e-QIP. On or about the same day he completed the e-
QIP he submitted an extensive addendum to his Counterintelligence Focused Security 
Screening Questionnaire, listing numerous relatives and contacts living in foreign 
countries, including those listed in the SOR. This allegation is found in his favor. 
 
Applicant gave two explanations for not disclosing information about sending 
$300 to his grandmother on a monthly basis for at least six years. During his interview in 
March 2013 he said that he did not know that he was required to disclose that 
information. Subsequently in two written responses he stated that he considered his 
small monthly payments to be charity and “immaterial,” and therefore he did not need to 
disclose it. Without additional clarifying information from him about his responses, the 
record evidence indicates that Applicant made a conscious decision not to disclose 
requested information in his e-QIP. This allegation is found against him. 
 
Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose the tax lien is credible. He did not 
know that a 2011 tax lien had been filed against him until he reviewed his credit report 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in 2013. He considered the debt resolved as of 2012. This allegation is found in his 
favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My Guideline C and B analysis is 
applicable to the whole-person analysis well.  
   
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s history of 
connections to Pakistan that weigh against granting him a security clearance. Applicant, 
his parents, and two siblings were born and resided in Pakistan. His grandfather, uncle, 
four aunts, and a friend are residents and citizens of Pakistan. He went to high school 
there. He has been a citizen for less than two years. His current work with the U.S. 
Army creates a greater risk of potential coercion, should terrorists learn of his work with 
the Army and that there are family members residing in Pakistan.  
 
There are a few factors that weigh in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He established some connections to the United States, including U.S. 
citizenship since 2012. His parents and four siblings are U.S. citizens and residents. His 
sister is on active duty in the U.S. Army. He has worked in the United States since 2006 
after arriving here. In addition, since 2013 Applicant has worked with the U.S. Armed 
Forces in some capacity in the Middle East. While that fact is not normally to be 
considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board noted in ISCR Case No. 
05-03846 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006) that in some circumstances it may be relevant. The 
Board stated as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s 
assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report a 
foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
In this case, Applicant did not submit any independent evidence or 
documentation from his Army command to establish that he has demonstrated ongoing 
compliance with security procedures during his position or that he has made a 
significant contribution to the national security under high-risk circumstances. That 
evidence is necessary in order to consider the above ruling for assistance in mitigating 
those factors that weigh against granting Applicant a security clearance. They include 
his foreign background, current family living in Pakistan, lack of significant longstanding 
connections to the United States, and a short period of U.S. citizenship.  
 
Another factor that weighs against Applicant’s request is his explanation for 
failing to disclose the monthly support he sent to his family in Pakistan for six years. He 
seemingly decided that those monthly payments were not relevant, and chose not to 
disclose them. Without more information addressing that allegation and his 
explanations, the personal conduct security concerns cannot be mitigated.    
 
Overall, the record evidence continues to leave me with sufficient questions as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He has not carried 
his burden to mitigate the foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:        For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT     
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
  11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
