 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 13-00771 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s parents and parents-in-law are deceased. Applicant, who wishes to 
become a linguist in Afghanistan, immigrated to the United States in 1990. Applicant 
has not traveled to Pakistan or Afghanistan in more than 10 years. His spouse and six 
children are U.S. citizens, and five of them are U.S. residents. He has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States that he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest involving his connections to Pakistan or Afghanistan in 
favor of the U.S. interest. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 4 and 13, 2011, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On September 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). (Item 
1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On October 28, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived 
his right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated November 22, 2013, was provided to him on December 14, 2013.1 Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 3, 2014. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. (FORM at 2) Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents to show detail and context for those facts. (AN Request) Administrative or 
official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 
2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d 
Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that 
are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, 
Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative 
notice). There was no objection about the accuracy of the AN materials, and 
Department Counsel’s request is granted.   I have also taken administrative notice of 
the U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011 because it 
contains positive information about Afghanistan’s relationship with the United States, 
and emphasizes the U.S. diplomatic and military goals in Afghanistan.    
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d. (HE 3) 
He partially admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e, and he provided mitigating 
information. (HE 3) His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is 62 years old, and he seeks employment as a linguist.3 He was born 
in Afghanistan. He attended school through high school in Afghanistan. From 1992 to 
                                            
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated November 26, 2013, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
December 14, 2013. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt 
to submit information.  
 
2To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.  
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
1993, he attended training and received a certificate for auto-body training. He attended 
college for four months in the United States in 2011.   
 
Around 1972, Applicant was drafted into the Afghanistan Security Forces where 
he served for one year. In 1977, Applicant married in Afghanistan. His spouse was born 
in Afghanistan. In 1979 and 1981, two of his children were born in Afghanistan, and in 
1985, 1988, and 1990, three of his children were born in Pakistan.  
 
In 1980, when Applicant was a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, he collected 
funds from a few people to support an entity that was part of the Mujhadeen.4 (SOR ¶ 
1.e) The funds were supposed to be used to purchase clothing and food for those 
fighting against the communist regime in Afghanistan and to fight the Russian troops in 
Afghanistan. In 2005, he stated that he does not associate with members of the entity.  
 
In 1981, Applicant left Afghanistan and moved to Pakistan.5 In 1990, Applicant 
moved to the United States. In 1993, one of Applicant’s children was born in the United 
States. All of Applicant’s children are now U.S. citizens. One son lives in the Caribbean 
while attending a post-graduate school, and his other five children live in the United 
States. He maintains frequent contact with his children. In 1996, Applicant became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. 
 
Applicant has six siblings living in Afghanistan and Pakistan, one brother living in 
Germany, and one brother living in the United States. Two of his brothers were drafted 
into the Afghan army and served in the Afghan Army for one year in the 1960s or 
1970s.6 He traveled to Pakistan and met his siblings from Pakistan and Afghanistan 
from about July through August 1998, February through April 2002, and January 
through February 2003.     
 
Applicant’s brother and three sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) His brother is a retired engineer, and his three sisters are 
housewives. One brother-in-law is deceased; one brother-in-law is a tailor; and the 
occupation of the other brother-in-law is unknown.  
 
One of Applicant’s brothers and one sister are residents of Pakistan. (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
His brother and his brother-in-law are physicians.     
 
                                                                                                                                            
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
SF 86 or Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). (Items 4, 9) 
 
4 The sources for the information in this paragraph are Items 1, 3-9 and FORM at 3-4. 
 
5Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph and the next three 
paragraphs is Applicant’s May 31, 2011, Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject 
interview (PSI). (Item 9) 
 
6The sources for the information in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are Items 1, 3-9 
and FORM at 4.  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant contacts his siblings living in Afghanistan and Pakistan every four 
months or less frequently. (Item 9) The exception is one sister living in Afghanistan with 
whom he communicates six times each year. (Item 9)  
 
Applicant’s father was employed by the Afghanistan Government as a clerk from 
1959 to 1964. (SOR ¶ 1.d; Items 1, 3-9) Applicant’s parents and parents-in-law are 
deceased. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant acknowledged the dangerous conditions in Pakistan and Afghanistan 
for himself and his relatives if he worked as a linguist for the United States. (Item 9) It 
could be dangerous for Applicant to leave the compound where U.S. forces are 
providing security. (Item 9) 
 
Applicant does not have any reportable arrests, convictions, or derogatory 
financial information. (Item 4) He does not abuse alcohol or illegal drugs. (Item 4) 
Applicant emphasized that he is loyal to the United States. (Item 9) 
   
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaeda and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target 
United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, 
car-jacking, assaults, or hostage taking. At this time, the risk of terrorist activities 
remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence 
is rampant. Insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other 
Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or 
immune from violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan: to disrupt, 
dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, and to 
prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . [T]he United States plans to 
remain politically, diplomatically, and economically engaged in 
Afghanistan for the long term.    
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011 at 13. The 
United States currently has thousands of combat troops deployed to Afghanistan. The 
U.S. Government plans to withdraw U.S. combat troops from Afghanistan in the next 
two years. On May 2, 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed the Enduring 
Strategic Partnership Agreement. This agreement demonstrates the United States’ 
long-term commitment to strengthen Afghanistan’s sovereignty and stability, in support 
of the goal of suppression of terrorism. The United States’ extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to citizens and residents of Afghanistan and Afghan Government problems 
developing and complying with the rule of law.  
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from power 
in Afghanistan. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
(Kpk), and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Pakistan.  
 
The Taliban, Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT), the Haqqani Network, and al Qaida operate 
in Pakistan, and in some instances elements of the Pakistan Government may be 
covertly aiding these terrorist or anti-U.S. entities. Taliban financing has been traced 
from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its 
military and technical capabilities. It is likely that in November 2008 LT was responsible 
for the attack in Mumbai, which caused numerous casualties. The Haqqani Network 
attacked the U.S. Embassy in Kabul in September 2011. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Pakistan worsened in 2008, driven in part 
by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide 
vital sanctuary to al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist 
groups. Al Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the 
Afghanistan insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and 
Western interests in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Pakistan Taliban and 
other extremists groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, 
plan and prepare regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and 
obtain equipment and supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of 
destabilizing suicide attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile 
government, military, and western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 
2008 due to such attacks. In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan 
conducted at least 40 suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 
600 Pakistan civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
Pakistan Government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail, phones, and electronic messages without the requisite court approval. In addition, 
Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, expand nuclear weapon 
stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery systems. In the aftermath of 
Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United States cut-off military aid to 
Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan became allied with the United States in 
counterterrorism. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border and sent thousands of troops and sustained hundreds of 
casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts and 
demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The United States 
is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and security. In 
2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide Pakistan with $3 
billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning in 2005.    
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special operations personnel raided a large compound in 
Pakistan and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaida. The raid raised concerns 
that the Pakistan Government had knowingly permitted terrorists, militants, and 
insurgents to find safe havens in Pakistan.    
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant was born and educated in Afghanistan. Around 1972, he was drafted 
into the Afghanistan Security Forces where he served for one year. In 1977, Applicant 
married in Afghanistan. His spouse was born in Afghanistan. Two of his children were 
born in Afghanistan, and three of his children were born in Pakistan.  
 
In 1980, when Applicant was a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, he collected 
funds from a few people to support an entity that was part of the Mujhadeen. The funds 
were intended to support an entity fighting against the communist regime in 
Afghanistan. The Applicant was a citizen and resident of Afghanistan at the time he 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
aided the resistance to the Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan. His assistance to the 
entity does not raise a security concern.    
 
In 1981, Applicant left Afghanistan and moved to Pakistan. In 1990, Applicant 
moved from Pakistan to the United States. He traveled to Pakistan and met his siblings 
in 1998, 2002, and 2003. Applicant has six siblings living in Afghanistan and Pakistan, 
and he communicates frequently with one of his siblings living in Afghanistan.  
  
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and 
obligation to his siblings. Influence, pressure, or coercion applied to Applicant’s siblings 
living in Pakistan and Afghanistan to obtain classified information from Applicant could 
result in a security concern. The content of Applicant’s communications with his siblings 
living in Pakistan and Afghanistan are not fully described in the record, and Applicant 
failed to establish his communications were casual. He frequently communicates (six 
times a year) with his sister living in Afghanistan. His ongoing communications over the 
years with siblings living in Afghanistan and Pakistan are sufficient to create “a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” His relationships with his siblings living in Afghanistan and Pakistan create a 
concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and 
his desire to help siblings living in Afghanistan and Pakistan. For example, if terrorists in 
Afghanistan or Pakistan wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert 
pressure on his siblings living in those countries. Applicant would then be subject to 
coercion and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
Applicant’s possession of close family ties with his siblings living in dangerous 
countries, such as Pakistan or Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying 
under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or their spouse has a close relationship with 
even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the 
potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationships of Pakistan and Afghanistan with the United States, places a 
significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate 
that his relationships with his siblings living in those countries do not pose a security 
risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his siblings living in Pakistan 
and Afghanistan, which are dangerous countries for anyone with a close link to the U.S. 
Government and classified material.  
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
or Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, his spouse, his in-laws, or his siblings living in those countries, nevertheless, 
it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. International terrorist groups 
are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable state intelligence 
services, and Pakistan and Afghanistan have a significant problem with terrorism. 
Applicant’s relationships with family members living in Pakistan and Afghanistan create 
a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise 
a security concern about his desire to assist family members in those countries by 
providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence of Applicant’s siblings living in Pakistan and Afghanistan. Department Counsel 
has established AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) and raised the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of 
any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant had frequent contact with 
his sister living in Afghanistan and less frequent contact with his other siblings living in 
Pakistan and Afghanistan. His loyalty and connections to his family living in Pakistan 
and Afghanistan are positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, 
those same connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and 
Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
relationships with relatives living in Pakistan and Afghanistan] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. In 1990, Applicant and his spouse moved to the 
United States. All six of Applicant’s children are now U.S. citizens. One son lives in the 
Caribbean while attending a post-graduate school, and his other five children live in the 
United States. He maintains close relationships with his spouse and children and 
frequently communicates with them. He is now 62 years old. When Applicant took an 
oath and swore allegiance to the United States in 1996, as part of his naturalization as a 
U.S. citizen, and when he volunteered to serve in Afghanistan in a combat zone as a 
linguist, he manifested his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all 
other countries.  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in Pakistan 
and Afghanistan. He frequently communicates with his sister living in Afghanistan and 
less frequently with other siblings living in Pakistan and Afghanistan. There is no 
evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan or Afghanistan Governments, 
or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, his spouse, 
or their family to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.7 As such, there 
is a reduced possibility that Applicant or his spouse’s family living in Pakistan or 
Afghanistan would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or 
exploitation. Of course, the primary risk to his family living in Pakistan and Afghanistan 
is from terrorists and other lawless elements and not the Pakistan or Afghanistan 
Government. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in Pakistan and 
Afghanistan. Applicant’s family in Pakistan and Afghanistan will become potential 
targets of terrorists because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s 
potential access to classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s 
family from lawless elements in Pakistan and Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant or his spouse’s involvement with family members living in Pakistan or 
Afghanistan. Applicant is not required to report his contacts with citizens or residents of 
Pakistan or Afghanistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because it is only available to mitigate security 
concerns arising under AG ¶ 7(e).8 Applicant does not have investments in Pakistan or 
Afghanistan.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his siblings living in Pakistan and Afghanistan 
are significant. He is close to his siblings and continues to communicate with them even 
though he has not been to Pakistan or Afghanistan in more than 10 years. Applicant’s 
connections to the United States are strong. His spouse and six children are all U.S. 
citizens. His spouse and five children are currently living in the United States. His 
connections to the United States are heavily outweigh his connections to his family in 
Pakistan and Afghanistan. He has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
involving his connections to Pakistan or Afghanistan in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated under Guideline B.  Even if security 
                                            
7There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access. 
   
8AG ¶ 7(e) reads, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
concerns are not mitigated under Guideline B, they are mitigated under the whole-
person concept, infra.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The factors weighing against approval of Applicant’s security clearance are less 
substantial than the factors weighing towards its approval. Applicant has siblings who 
are residents and citizens of Pakistan and Afghanistan. Even though he has not visited 
Afghanistan or Pakistan in more than 10 years, he maintains contacts with his siblings.  
His connections to his family in Pakistan and Afghanistan make Applicant more 
vulnerable as a target of coercion by lawless elements in those countries. His family in 
those countries will be at a greater risk if his clearance is granted.    
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Pakistan and Afghanistan must take into 
consideration the geopolitical situation and dangers there.9 Those countries are 
dangerous places because of violence from terrorists and other lawless elements. 
Terrorists continue to threaten the Pakistan and Afghanistan Government, the interests 
of the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. The 
Afghanistan and Pakistan Governments do not fully comply with the rule of law or 
protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States, Pakistan, and Afghanistan 
Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the United 
States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade. Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the 
United States occasionally have profound policy disputes.     
 
                                            
9 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s connections to the United States warrant greater weight than his 
connections to his siblings living in Pakistan and Afghanistan. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed 
any security violations. When he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance 
to the United States. His spouse and six children are U.S. citizens, and all of them 
reside in the United States, except for his oldest son. He volunteered to serve as a 
linguist with U.S. forces in Afghanistan. There is no evidence that terrorists or other 
foreign elements have specifically targeted Applicant or his family living in Pakistan and 
Afghanistan.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has carried his 
burden and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
