 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-03022 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by her financial situation. She 
responsibly addressed the majority of her past-due debts and her finances appear to be 
under control. Clearance is granted. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.1 On September 11, 2014, Applicant answered the 
SOR, waived her right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the written record 
(Answer). See Hearing Exhibit I (Applicant requests administrative determination). 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On April 23, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains four documentary exhibits that are 
admitted into evidence, without objection, as Exhibits (Ex.) 1 – 4. Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM or any documents within the allotted 30-day period. 
See Hearing Exhibit 1 (Applicant acknowledges receipt of FORM on May 11, 2015). 
 
 On July 18, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case. On my own motion, I opened 
the record to provide Applicant a final opportunity to submit a response to the FORM 
and relevant documents. The original deadline was twice extended due to technical 
issues in transmitting the notice reopening the record and receiving Applicant’s 
submission. See Hx. III – V. Applicant submitted documentation regarding the 
satisfaction of one of the SOR debts, Ex. 5, by the deadline. Ex. 5 was admitted without 
objection, and the record closed on September 11, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in her mid-forties, is divorced with two children. She is a high 
school graduate. She has owned and lived in her home since 1992. She has been a 
federal contractor since 2006, working for her current employer as a quality inspector. 
She supplements her income with part-time work as an animal trainer. 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 2013. She 
disclosed that she was experiencing financial trouble. She noted that her mortgage had 
become delinquent when her former husband, who was responsible for paying the 
mortgage, had failed to do so. She went to court to remedy the situation and contacted 
her lender to modify the loan. She was able to modify the loan and is paying her 
mortgage.2 A recent credit report, Ex. 4, corroborates her statement.3  
 
Applicant also revealed in her SCA two delinquent debts for a past-due credit 
card account and a delinquent car loan that her former husband was responsible for 
paying.4 She submitted documentation that the $12,000 credit card debt was satisfied in 
June 2015,5 and the recent credit report reflects that the $7,000 car debt was satisfied 
in March 2015.6 These two debts are listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. In addition to these 
paid debts, the background investigation uncovered six medical accounts in collection 
status. These medical accounts together total less than $800, and are listed at SOR ¶¶ 
1.c – 1.h. Applicant denies these alleged medical debts.  
 
 
                                                          
2 Ex. 1 at 31.  
 
3 Ex. 4, Trade Lines 3 and 13. 
 
4 Ex. 1 at 28-30.  
 
5 Ex. 5. 
 
6 Ex. 4, Public Records 1. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.7  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
7 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”). 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s recent financial problems raise the financial considerations security 
concern. It also establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems appear to stem from her divorce after nearly 20 
years of marriage and her former husband’s failure to live up to his legal obligations to 
pay debts that he accepted as part of the divorce. Applicant responsibly addressed the 
majority of her past-due debts. Specifically, she modified her mortgage and brought it 
current. Additionally, she submitted evidence of having satisfied her past-due credit card 
account and a recent credit report reflects that her past-due vehicle account has been 
satisfied. The remaining SOR debts, which together total less than $800, do not 
undercut the significant efforts Applicant has made to take control of her finances. 
 
5 
 
 
Furthermore, her demonstrated track record of debt repayment provides sufficient 
assurance that she will address any remaining debts and continue to manage her 
finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified information. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(d) apply.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.8 Applicant met her burden.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been upfront and candid about her financial situation since the start of the security 
clearance process. This favorable record evidence, when coupled with Applicant’s 
responsible action in addressing her delinquent debts, mitigates the security concerns 
at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
