1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-02901
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant regularly used marijuana for over 30 years, until testing positive for the
drug at work. He also had an alcohol-related driving offense. The evidence is insufficient
to mitigate resulting security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings,
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on December 21,
2011. On December 30, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug
Involvement), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on January 23, 2014, and requested
a decision based on the administrative record. On February 6, 2014, Department
2
Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge pursuant to Directive ¶
E3.1.7, and notified Applicant of this request. Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on February 12, 2014. The case was assigned to me on February 18, 2014.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Video
Teleconference Hearing on March 11, 2014, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled,
on March 27, 2014. Applicant and the court reporter attended the hearing in person.
Department Counsel participated from DOHA Headquarters by video teleconference.
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection, and testified on
his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until April 10,
2014, for submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on April 4, 2014. On April 9, 2014, I granted Applicant’s request to keep
the record open until April 21, 2014. Applicant timely submitted AE B through D, which
were admitted without objection and the record closed.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since October 2005 as a metal fabricator. He attended high school through the
eleventh grade. He never married, and has no children. He has no military service, and
has not previously applied for or held a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 7-9.) 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of all allegations set
forth in the SOR. Applicant’s admissions, including his statements in response to DOHA
interrogatories (GE 2), are incorporated in the following findings.
Applicant admitted that he has regularly used marijuana since age 14 (in 1980),
describing his use as “about twice per month on average.” (AR; GE 2.) He purchased
the marijuana he used during that period. (AR.) He was cited for possession of
marijuana in 1987 or 1988 and paid a fine. During September 2011, his employer
required him to take a random urinalysis test. He was notified in October 2011 that his
sample had tested positive for marijuana. As a result, he received a written reprimand
and was suspended without pay from October 3, 2011, to November 3, 2011. He was
not required to undergo counseling or treatment, and did not do so. (GE 2.) He testified
that he stopped using marijuana after this incident, because he had purchased a home
and “it’s just not worth it.” (Tr. 27, 35-36.)
During December 2003, Applicant attended a trade show and dined with the
owner of the company for whom he worked as a truck driver. He drank enough to
become intoxicated. The next day when he stopped at a weigh station, the inspecting
official smelled alcohol on his breath. He was not considered to have been driving while
intoxicated; but was not allowed to drive for 24 hours and was cited for an alcohol
violation and fined $400, which he paid. (AR; GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 36.)
Applicant provided the results of a random urinalysis test that he took during
November 2013 that was negative for any drugs of abuse. (AE A.) A coworker who has
3
known Applicant for about eight years described him as a hard worker who can be
counted on, and who is ethical with the exception of having failed a drug test. The
coworker believed  that Applicant “fully understands and is in fulfillment of the crucial
requirement to remain drug free, knowing that federal law still mandates that Marijuana
(and other) use is illegal.” (AE B.) A customer representative sent Applicant’s supervisor
an email saying that Applicant was very professional and a pleasure to be around. (AE
C.) Applicant received a certificate of appreciation from his employer on August 8, 2012,
for providing outstanding support to a program designing and installing affordable green
building materials. (AE D.) 
Applicant requested that the record be left open to allow him to submit a
statement of intent not to abuse drugs in the future, with automatic clearance revocation
for any violation. He submitted other documents while the record remained open, but
did not submit a statement or other evidence that he did not intend to abuse drugs in the
future. He testified that he still associates with people with whom he has used
marijuana, who have “been my friends forever.” (AE B through AE D; Tr. 38-40.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
4
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs supported by the evidence in this case are:
(a) any drug abuse; 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Applicant admitted to regularly purchasing and using marijuana from 1980
through September 2011, resulting in a positive urinalysis test in October 2011. He was
cited and fined for marijuana possession in 1987 or 1988. 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
5
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and,
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant’s last known marijuana abuse was in September 2011. He admitted to
regular use of that drug for more that 30 years, since age 14. He testified that he ended
his drug abuse after his positive urinalysis test and resulting suspension. He failed to
provide persuasive evidence of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(a) or (b), however, since he
still associates with drug-abusing friends, provided no statement of intent to not abuse
drugs in the future, and has not changed the environment where he regularly abused
marijuana. His drug abuse did not involve prescription drugs, and he offered no
evidence of drug treatment, so no mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(c) or (d) was established.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs supported by the evidence in this case are:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
6
Applicant admitted to regular illegal use of marijuana over more than 30 years,
and to an alcohol-related driving offense in 2003. 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
As discussed above concerning guideline H, Applicant’s drug use occurred over
an extended period, and he offered insufficient evidence to support a conclusion that it
is unlikely to recur. Mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a) therefore was not established. Applicant
offered insufficient evidence to support mitigation under any of the other mitigating
conditions, since he admitted the offenses, offered no evidence that he was coerced to
commit them, and did not demonstrate rehabilitation.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Department Counsel asserted applicability of the catch-all provision under
AG ¶ 16(c), and “possibly” (without evidence) that Applicant violated a written
commitment to his employer under AG ¶ 16(f). I do not find that the evidence is
insufficient for an adverse finding under any other guideline. Nor did Department
Counsel provide any evidence of a relevant written commitment by Applicant. To the
extent that appeal board precedent obligates the consideration of AG ¶ 15 concerns
when such allegations appear in an SOR, I conclude that Applicant’s conduct involved
7
questionable judgment and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations against
substance abuse. No pertinent Guideline E mitigating condition was established.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant admitted to a long
history of recreational drug abuse and a single minor alcohol-related driving offense.
Although he claims to have stopped using marijuana after testing positive on a drug
test, the evidence does not support a finding that continuation or recurrence are
unlikely, or that behavioral changes demonstrate rehabilitation. Applicant is a mature
and experienced individual who is accountable for his choices. Overall, the record
evidence creates ongoing doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
8
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
